To make sure I give you the full time.
Um, so, uh, we will commence in the subcommittee.
Um, welcome Sam and ISMS Limited, uh, and
Oh, Craig Elli. Thank
You. And there's 10
minutes for your submission.
You may like to do some tough questions.
I'll let you know when there's a minute to run.
Take your written submission as read the floor's. Yours.
Good morning. Um, and thank you
for the opportunity to speak.
My name is Sam Arnold,
and I'm the Chief Executive of ISMS Limited.
We operate both land-based casinos
and online casinos worldwide.
I'm the group sole shareholder, so
who you see is who you get.
I'm a New Zealand citizen, but I have had to live
and work abroad for the last 20 years.
Today is important for me
and I have flown here specifically from New York to appear
before the committee because I intend
to apply for a license.
I want to be very clear that I support the bill,
but I do not agree with selling the 15 licenses
by way of an auction.
I believe this is leaving money on the table.
And I'm here to convince you
to replace the auction-based process
with a points-based merit system similar to an RFP
or a request for proposal.
I believe it is imperative
that a physical presence is required in New Zealand
for all licensees.
My understanding is that is that no physical, uh, presence,
presence is, is required in the current legislation.
This will not create local employment.
This will not create local wealth, local industry,
and it will encourage operators
to minimize New Zealand company taxes
and fund employees overseas.
To support my proposed amendment, I rely on my 24 years
of background in the gaming industry.
I started my first business in Hastings at 16 years of age,
buying and selling used pokey machines at 16.
I wasn't allowed to gamble,
but it was okay for me to sell machines.
When I was 18, I started my first New Zealand company,
and it was around this time that the Department
of Internal Affairs provided me
with my first big opportunity.
This was the stepping stones for what I was able
to achieve in the next 20 years.
At the time, the DIA changed the regulations on all poking
machines and required them to be upgraded to comply
with a new online monitoring system.
And that meant at the time,
all 20,000 machines became obsolete
and had no value in New Zealand.
I brought the majority of those 20,000 machines.
I built a small refurbishment warehouse
and made the machines export ready.
And at the peak of this, I was exporting 20 containers
of used poking machines through the port of nap.
When I sold the last poking machines,
there was no opportunities in New Zealand for me.
There were no licensing opportunities,
no casino opportunities, and I had no choice
but to leave New Zealand and build a business overseas.
Over the last 20 years,
I built a multinational organization.
I opened businesses
and employed people in Australia, Singapore, Hong Kong,
Macau, Seychelles, Mauritius, Malta, Latvia,
London, the Isle of Man, Ireland, Florida in the us,
Nevada in the us, Mexico, Panama, Columbia,
and Peru to name a few.
And I've opened all types of gaming businesses,
distribution online casinos, land-based casinos, business
to business provider, business to consumer provider,
software and platform development.
And up until now, there has been absolutely no opportunity
for me to return home.
And this licensing opportunity is the first in my
career in 20 years.
And it has always been my passion
to create a company in my industry
entirely based in New Zealand, employing New Zealanders.
And it is for this reason that I'm here in person
because I'm passionate about wanting the opportunity
to have a license in New Zealand
because I want to establish my business in New Zealand
where I started from.
And I want that business to be part of a sustainable,
viable, and most importantly, ethical industry
that provides as many benefits to the community as possible.
But to achieve this, I must convince you
that the current draft legislation needs to be amended
to support a merit-based system.
An auction-based system implies
whoever has the biggest check wins,
but it attracts the wrong kind of overseas operator
that does not have New Zealand's interest at heart.
They are not going to create local employment.
They are not going to make local charity donations,
and they are going to milk the cow and cow
and pay minimal company's tax.
And if I were privileged to have a license, I would build
or buy a building right here in New Zealand.
I would employ New Zealanders on day one,
and I would create 30 brand new roles in day one.
I also have a proven business plan that we have used abroad,
and I could increase that
to 500 jobs within the first 18 months with a payroll
that would exceed
$35 million under a port.
Under a merit based points system, the parameters
to ensure the revenue and profit created is distributed
and invested back into New Zealand.
Creating those brand new roles will be more certain
by not using a points based system.
Money is going to be left on the table.
In fact, it is going to go off the table
because an overseas operator will pay the mandatory
12% duty.
The 15% GST, the 12 point, uh, sorry,
the 1.24 problem gambling levy.
But the 28% company's tax is
where the money will leave the table.
Any overseas operator will employ abroad will legitimately
fund those expenses from its New Zealand revenue
diluting the company's tax payable in New Zealand only.
Last week, the media reported a well-known overseas company
with $435 million
of New Zealand revenues paid only $4.9 million in tax.
That multinational company sent nearly $307 million
offshore in fees.
And this is an example of diluting
market research varies,
but suggests the online casinos have a revenue
of $700 million on this revenue.
The duty GST
and problem gambling levy would be valued
to the government at approximately $200 million,
and that leaves a gross company's tax liability
of an additional $200 million.
And that is a lot of money to be leaving on the table.
And overseas operators is where the dilution happens.
The only way to minimize this is
to have a merit-based point system, which rewards companies
for establishing and operating their businesses
entirely in New Zealand.
One more minute. Okay.
All of the, all of the contribution
and pay PAYE on the wages
that I pay would stay in New Zealand.
I'm not saying to exclude multinationals from applying,
I'm saying to replace the auction allocation system
with a merit based system.
A merit based system also creates a real tangible aid
to help the regulator monitor
and ensure the highest levels of compliance.
Allowing extra credit to an application from an organization
that is going to operate in New Zealand provides the
regulator the best monitoring options
rather than at the, the regulator
or internal affairs needing to take an international flight
to visit an operator overseas.
It's going to be much easier for the regulator
to regulate the industry with a New Zealand based operator.
Thank you. We have actually run out
of our 10 minutes there, sorry.
And we've got a full program, so we'll have to end it there.
But I really appreciate you coming in and,
and for the really clear, um,
written submission which cover, which covers those points.
So thank you for making the trip to New Zealand.
We, we appreciate it and we hope to see you home soon. Okay.
With that, we will, uh, move to our next submission,
which is Communities Against Alcohol Harm on Zoom.
We should have Dr. Grant new. We are
Done.
She, sorry. We'll just give him a minute to come up.
Thank you very much, um, joining us then.
So, um, uh, Dr. Grant, you should be able to unmute.
Turn on your camera now and we'll be with you.
Uh, is the camera working? I'll just see.
No, but, but in the meantime or here we are. We can see.
Thank you. Thank you. We've got 10 minutes.
Uh, you might like to leave some time for questions.
Take your written submission as read
and I'll let you know when there's
a minute to run the floor's. Yours.
Well, Koto, uh, thank you very much.
Um, uh, Dr. Grant Huon, thank you for the opportunity
to make this presentation.
I represent communities against KO harm.
You have an interest in the harm, uh,
from the combined effects of gambling and alcohol,
and our submission opposes the online casino gambling bill.
In its current form,
we are particularly concerned about the combined effects
of alcohol harm and gambling, uh, which
of course are much better able
to be managed in physical venues such
as tns, where there's gambling.
We cannot see how access, uh, particularly the, the level
of access that's promoted through this bill
to online gambling, uh, is going to work.
Um, in terms of restricting people who might be intoxicated,
uh, from undertaking this gambling, while the regulation
of online gambling, um, is necessary,
this bill is overly permissive, commercially driven,
and fails to protect New Zealanders.
And as I said, particularly where, uh, they might be enticed
to gambling while they're intoxicated.
Online gambling, uh, particularly casino gambling is
amongst one of the most harmful forms of gambling.
It's designed for addiction.
It's fast-paced, continuous play, flashing visuals,
the bills, protections, self-exclusion,
deposit limits are weak.
Um, we think they'll be inconsistently enforced
and place the burden on the individual.
Um, and as we've seen with, even with the, the current, uh,
crossover between gambling and,
and alcohol, um, that'll place quite a burden on the,
on the individual, um, particularly if they're in,
in intoxicated state.
Critically, there's no requirement for operators
to fund harm reduction or treatment.
Um, that's outta step with international good practice
and out of step with the way in which gambling is, uh,
currently, um, managed.
Uh, and out this bull, in our view,
will not create casual gamblers.
It will intensify harm amongst existing gamblers.
Uh, people already using pokies, TAB lotteries
or casinos will shift
to the more harmful online casino environment, which, um,
we we're very concerned is going to be largely unable to be,
uh, complied with and enforced and regulated.
It also removes social and physical barriers.
So even if, uh,
people are gambling within physical environments such
as VINs or or other places, um, they're within a social
or physical environment, uh, where, uh, the managers
of those venues can observe them, where there is some, um,
regulation and, uh, there's the, the opportunity for
agencies to, uh, ensure there's monitoring and compliance.
We can't see that happening anywhere to the same degree,
if at all, under an online environment.
We are also concerned that this, um, bill will threaten, um,
the existing industries who do have these kinds
of controls on them, uh, such as the, the, uh,
the racing industry,
and of course, uh, VINs with, uh, gambling, uh,
opportunities within them.
Um, the, there are communities, um, uh,
that rely on the funding that comes through.
Uh, from those, um, those, uh, environments
that exist currently, we're concerned that, um, the, uh,
online casino operators won't be, um,
facing the same obligations of ensuring there are returns
to communities, uh, or funding harm minimization.
And this creates an uneven playing field, uh,
for the existing industry.
We think the bill really undermines the
community benefit principle.
Essentially, we've allowed gambling, uh, within our Toro
and New Zealand based on a principle
that there be community benefit, that there be proceeds
that go back to local communities, uh, from gambling.
And this, uh, bill, uh, undermines that profits
as our previous, uh, speaker said,
risk being extracted offshore with little return
to communities who bear the harm
and must, um, support people, uh, who have been harmed.
The other, uh, aspect is that, uh,
the gambling Act 2003 allows for public objections
to casino licenses, um, particularly their renewals.
And we've seen a number of casino licenses come up
for renewal and their various public objectives were able
to participate in those processes and bring evidence
and information before the gambling commission, um,
and also, uh, seek stronger conditions
or, uh, stronger commitments from those operators.
Uh, and we think that principle should apply here.
So allowing for, uh, at least the renewal of these licenses,
uh, to be subject to, uh, public, uh, objections to, uh,
hearings before the gambling commission so
that communities can have a voice,
at least in the renewal period, um, to, uh,
whether these operators are operating to the standards that,
um, are expected or that they've committed to.
So in terms of closing, our recommendations are
to reject the bill in its entirety,
but, uh, should the bill, um, proceed through,
then there needs to be a focus on, uh,
mandatory operator contributions to prevent harm
and to support treatment, uh, to establish a centralized,
uh, register, uh, so that the community can see, uh,
what is taking place, uh,
and that there's reporting, uh, that's able
to be made public, ensure there are robust community
return obligations.
Um, moving back to the principle that there should be,
if there is gambling, then there should be a community
benefit or return from that gambling.
Learn from the international models, uh,
that are best practice.
Uh, our concern is perhaps we're taking a weaker approach
than best practice internationally, uh,
and engage properly with health experts, iwi, hapu,
and affected communities.
Um, so thanks very much for your time.
I, I did leave some time, uh,
available if there are any questions.
Um, so very happy to answer anything
that you may, uh, wish to ask. Thanks, grant. We'll
Start with Celia Wade Brown.
Thank you, grant. Thank you for your, um, submission.
I was wanting to follow up, um, the example,
the international examples, Norway and Italy.
Um, it seems that Norway, um,
has very strict controls on gambling in general
and also online gambling.
Do they have a much lower, um,
incidents of gambling harm?
Yeah, it essentially the, the, uh, stronger, um,
you regulate these industries, um, that the,
the lower incidence of gambling harm
or the more support you have for people
who are affected by gambling harm.
Um, and yeah, it, it's the same applies with alcohol
and with those particularly Scandinavian countries, um,
that they, they highly regulate, um, access to that.
And therefore the harm is much less than perhaps
environments like New Zealand
or New Zealand where we, um,
don't regulate to the same extent.
Or probably probably another really key aspect is we don't
fund the regulators well either.
So we, we put in place regulations, which we expect them to,
um, follow and to, uh, ensure monitoring compliance with.
But unless the funding comes, um,
to support those agencies do their job,
then essentially we have a kind of regulatory failure.
So it's not only, um, best practice regulation,
it's also ensuring that the funding
for the regulators is available to ensure
that they can do the job they've been asked to do.
Thank you,
Uh, Limon, Lydia Sini.
Uh, thanks Grant. Really appreciate your submission.
Just very quickly, uh,
following on from Celia's question just
around the treatment options, um, can you,
could you name a few in terms of the harm minimization?
Yeah, well, I, look, uh, last night I was at a, um, a,
a recovery meeting, uh, for a range of people
who are facing, you know, face addiction in our country.
And I'd really, um, invite any of you who haven't been
to one of those meetings, um, to just go
and experience that.
It's very humbling, um, run by philanthropic organizations,
uh, by churches, by, you know, organizations
that are not, not well funded.
And, um, I find I found it a very humbling experience
where essentially a, a large group of 40
or 50 people, um, were supporting each other
and, um, s you know, supporting the,
the various addictions they had, including gambling.
So I think, I think, uh, my experience of that is
that we rely heavily, um, in terms of, uh, recovery
and, um, treatment
and, um, support on, on agencies that are even outside the,
the ones that are, that are key, that are funded.
Um, so I think coming back to,
to really answer your question, there, there are a number
that, uh, are funded
and funded through the current, um, measures.
But I think with online gambling, um, the,
the difficulty is, is
that people will do this much more in a,
in a secret environment, in an environment where, uh,
their family whanau don't know that they're, um,
engaged in this activity.
And even getting them to acknowledge, uh, an addiction
and getting them to treatment will be much more difficult
than it is in environments where they have to physically,
you know, leave the, leave the house or leave their car
or leave some, uh, uh, somewhere
and go into a venue to gamble.
Thank you very much for your time, grant.
We appreciate it today.
Um, that, uh, time is unfortunately up, so we'll move on
to our next submission from Snow Sports New
Zealand's Nick Kavanaugh.
Um, same deal, 10 minutes.
I'll let you know when there's one to go take this.
Red floor's. Yours,
Uh, Tina Carto, uh, thank you for the opportunity
to present, um, snow Sports New Zealand's view on the bill.
My name's Nick Cavan. I'm the Chief executive
of Snow Sports New Zealand, which covers the disciplines of,
uh, alpine skiing, cross country skiing, free ride
adaptive snow sports, snowboarding, and free skiing.
Uh, we acknowledge the government's objective, uh,
to regulate the online gaming, uh,
to protect New Zealanders and minimize harm.
These are reasonable and sensible goals.
However, as drafted, we believe the, the bill fails
to uphold a principle
that has guided gambling law in New Zealand since, uh,
for nearly 50 years.
And that is that gaming
or gambling revenues must support the communities
that be at the risk why this matters.
Snow Sports New Zealand relies on community trust funding
to deliver grassroots programs that serve clubs, juniors,
volunteers, and adaptive athletes.
This is not high performance. This is funded separately.
This is about equity, access, and participation.
Last year, um, snow Sports New Zealand
received approximately $180,000 from gaming trusts.
That money allowed us to run junior competitions
and events, training for volunteers, adaptive programs
for disabled New Zealanders
and club initiatives like, uh, peak respect and our women
and girls strategy pui.
Without that funding, these programs would simply disappear.
If the bull passes in its current form,
the consequences would be immediate and severe.
Fewer grassroots events
and pathways for our Ranga Tahi reduced access
for disabled New Zealanders reduced opportunities
for low income, uh, backgrounds
and a decline in volunteer capacity.
We also acknowledge the economic consequences are far
reaching as participation could fall
and community organizations weaker weaken the government may
face, uh, higher expenditure in healthcare, social services
and programs to combat inactivity and isolation.
Our request for nearly 50 years through the 1977
Gambling and Lotteries Act in the 2003 Gambling Act
government of all political stripes have upheld the
principle that gambling should benefit the community.
We ask that this principle be embedded in the online
gambling by, uh, requiring a significant proportion
of gambling revenue to be independently
and transparently distributed back
to community organizations
and ensuring online contributions don't, uh, supplement,
but do not replace pokey trust fundings.
In closing, every year I watch young New Zealanders take
their first turns on snow.
For some, it's a pathway to Olympic and Paralympic dreams.
For most, it's just simply joy, connection and belonging.
None of this happens without volunteers, clubs,
and grassroots programs,
and none of this will survive without community funding.
The committee has the opportunity to not just regulate
online gambling, but to safeguard a principle
that has supported communities for generations that gambling
must give back to the community that bears the risk.
Nui, thank you very much, and I'm, uh,
happy to take questions.
Thank you. We'll start with Tom Fin,
Uh, thank you, Nick.
Question around, uh, the return to the community for those
that do online gambling, should it be at the same rate as,
uh, in-person, uh, poking machines have to do at the moment,
which is in, in and around 40%?
If you ask any CEO of snow, you know, of, of, of sports,
you'd probably say that would be the minimum.
Yeah. Yeah. Um, and,
And, uh, do you have any idea how you think, uh,
it could be implemented?
So at present, uh, we have a structure for, uh,
funds collected in person.
Do you think we should follow a similar structure
for the online casinos?
Oh, no. That's probably our job to work that out,
but I'm keen, keen to understand your view on
what you think would work best.
Um, probably, yeah, it's outside of my scope,
but obviously, uh, um, the, the less amount
of regulation probably the best. Yeah.
Yeah. Thank you. Thank you. Uh, Celia,
Thank you. Chair. Thank you
for coming in.
Thank you for the work you are doing.
Um, do you see a risk that, um,
if we don't put in funding for community
with the online gambling, um,
that the in-person gambling will go down as this rises,
and so your existing funding might reduce as well?
I think we're seeing that already.
Um, if, uh, if I track the last couple of years simply, uh,
even post COVID, um, there was certainly, um, uh,
a sense that, um,
revenues from balance sources are declining
and it's becoming more, more difficult
for organizations. And
If I could ask a follow up.
Thank you. Um, and in an ideal world,
would you feel more comfortable with, um,
straightforward government funding without
having to come from gaming?
Or do you feel, um, neutral about that?
Uh, I think it would be a bit tone deaf
currently at the moment.
If, um, if we'd asked government for more funding
to replace this, um, our current funding from Sport NZ
to deliver in this space, just over $50,000 per annum.
So for us to be asking government in the current economic
climate for a close to 400% increase to replicate this
or replace it, I think would, um, be a little bit tone deaf.
Thank you. Thank you for an excellent submission.
We appreciate you coming in today.
Um, and with that,
we are gonna move on line for the next one.
Thank you. Have we got, uh, Andrea or Blind Low Vision?
We need? That's okay.
Um, who's in the room is the Association
of New Zealand Adventurers
Advertisers.
Advertisers. Advertisers, sorry. I apologize.
Please come forward. We, we would love to,
uh, to hear you now.
No. At all. So for the next 10 minutes and,
and we've got your written, uh, submission in front of us.
Yes. But, um, and,
and like the last one, you might like to leave time
for questions, but it's all yours.
Absolutely. Yeah. Uh, thank, thank you very much everybody
for the opportunity to speak this morning.
Uh, my name's Lindsay Moat, uh, chief Executive
of the Association of New Zealand Advertisers.
Um, Anza, the acronym, uh,
represents advertisers across all major, um, sectors,
and we advocate for responsible advertising without which we
lose a social license to promote products and services.
Our focus in our submission today is, um, specifically
around, um, issues regarding advertising,
not whether online casinos should be, um, regulated
or should, should be, uh, established.
So just, um, I'm gonna make four, uh, four brief points
and then opens the questions.
So in terms of advertising regulation, um, the bill
in its form ignores the effective role
of the advertising Standards Authority.
That's not us. It's, um, clarify
that the Advertising Standards Authority has in setting
standards for adver all advertising of all products
and services in all media.
Um, the a SA has submitted directly, uh, we support
what they're doing, so I'll simply reinforce that it works.
Uh, um, the a SA works effectively with regulators
as diverse as the Commerce Commission and Med Safe,
and there's no reason why it couldn't work
with a regulator in this space
as the first point of contact.
Its rules are principles based.
They enable complaints to be considered on the base of, of
what was intended by the advertiser shades of gray,
if you like, which are very difficult
to replicate in legislation
or regulation, um, where loopholes can often be exploited.
And I could give you a couple
of example potential examples of those.
Um, and their rules are regularly reviewed, typically, um,
the codes every five or six years.
So, and again, that is a standard which typically doesn't
apply to legislation or regulation.
So messages, please don't undermine a framework that works
for the rest of rest of advertising for one sector,
which leads to the proposed complaints process
where any complaints regarding advertising along
with any other complaints would be directed to the licensee.
I couldn't imagine a worse situation than for someone
who had a, you know, might consider a problem in gambling,
uh, situation who felt targeted by advertising, who then had
to complain to
that licensee rather than directly to the a SA.
Um, the public already knows how to, to use the
as a's complaints process.
Um, why not in in this situation?
Um, the, as SA will be faster, independent, transparent
and more consistent in dealing with complaints
regarding advertising.
There are two unintended consequences we believe in the
bill, which I'd just like to, to highlight.
Mm-hmm. Firstly, my understanding is the bill, well, one
of the intentions, the bill is to stop illegal advertising,
um, by online casinos that won't,
all it will do is allow a certain number of operators
to legally advertise.
Unlicensed entities will continue to do so,
and a world of AI generation, uh, the DIA,
if the regulator will be faced with an unwinnable game
of Whack-a-mole, trying to, trying to stop 'em,
they will just continue to pop up
and look advertising saturation.
We support competition.
So this is slightly difficult,
but we're faced with a prospect of up
to five 15 licensees on day one, who are going
to have a surge of advertising
to establish themselves in the market.
They're going to be wanting market share, they're going
to want to be leaders surge of advertising
for a previously illegal product.
The risk of public backlash, and with that loss of trust
and responsible advertising does concern us.
This is a very different scenario from when, for example,
lotteries, um, were allowed to, were established
and allowed to, um, advertise or casino
because essentially, um, uh, monopolies were established
and that had an economic limitation on
how much advertising would take place.
Otherwise, you would just have wastage.
But with 15, up to 15 going, it's a different situation.
And so to close, um, we off, um, we do make one offer, um,
the suggestion of independent pre-vetting
of advertising content.
Um, Anza has a history of doing this.
Um, we set up that
for alcohol when alcohol advertising was first
allowed on television.
We've been doing it successfully in the area
of therapeutic products, which have a range of issues
around, um, claims.
We think that could work effectively for the content part
of advertising in the situation.
So thank you. I'd be very happy to take any questions.
Thank you, uh, very much.
One of the things we've heard from some submitters is
concern about digital advertising, social media,
YouTube, other platforms.
Um, can you give us a steer of how controllable,
in your view is that,
and what kind of measures could be put in place?
Uh, that's a very, that's a very big continuum.
Um, in terms of what, what is the job?
I mean, it is essentially almost all advertising is,
is now digital, um, that that's the reality.
Um, I know for example, the suggestion that, um,
influencers should be banned.
Well, we could, an advertiser can now create, um,
an AI influencer non-human.
Now, is the legislation going to be able to deal with
that versus a human influencer?
How do you even define what an influencer is?
These are the things where the a SA has a very open
definition of advertising.
Um, essentially it is everything which is funded by,
by the adv advertiser.
That means that you are future proofing your standards
because, um, yeah, who knows
what advertising's gonna look like in five or 10 years.
I certainly don't. Um,
but at the end of the day, it will be captured.
Okay. Um, who was waiting before I jump in the end? Uh,
Thank you. Um,
yeah, just, uh, probably a supplementary from the chair,
uh, in terms of specific submitters have asked the committee
to consider banning advertising because, um,
And in its entirety and
Well, especially when you've got AI versus human,
like you've just, uh, elaborated on today.
What could, what advice could you offer
for the committee to consider?
Um, you've talked about a ASAs, uh, soldier, but
unless it's in the works in legislation, it is going
to be difficult to
Well, well, I, I, I, I would, um, counter that by saying,
uh, this advertising is illegal today.
Um, it's banned, and yet I can, on my phone,
I'm constantly being served,
and I'm not a gambler a little bit on the TAB,
I'm sport betting, but I'm constantly being served as
So the fact that you write in the legislation
that it's going to be banned. Mm. Yeah.
But I, I guess what I'm asking is to be more explicit
around future proofing for the committee to consider,
because obviously we've got all these submitters coming at
us saying what to do.
Our role will be to really highlight the black
and white, what is it,
what we see submitters they're asking,
but also with the bill, do we amend parts of it?
Do we make it more solid? Do we relax it a bit?
Um, our recommendation is simply you use the a SA to
regulate what, um, is appropriate for advertising.
Okay. Um, and, and in the same way they do with food
and beverage, um, there is already a gambling code in place
that could easily be reviewed and updated,
because at the moment, it doesn't reflect online gambling
because that is illegal.
The one thing the a SA can't do is set rules
around advertising where it's illegal.
Okay. Thank You. Let them do the work. Yeah,
Thank that. Um,
I'm just interested in following up on these issues
of advertising online.
Um, apparently there are ways that, um,
internet providers can be required to block certain, um,
domains and so forth to prevent that.
And, um, we were appointed to the downs of Norway. Mm-hmm.
Um, and I just wonder whether, are we just not using that
facility at the moment in New Zealand in that Yes,
I've been offered those too.
Unfortunately, I'm not a gambler. Um, but
So you can imagine what it would be like if you were
Yeah, exactly.
So are we not taking, um, the illegality
of it seriously at the moment?
Look, it's really challenging
because you are dealing with so many platforms,
and at the end of the end of the day, yes, you might get,
um, three or four, you know, some of the large platforms
who are typically based overseas, you might get compliance
with them, it's likely to be slow.
Um, and so,
but then we are awash with other other means for people
to reach, um, via target or audience.
So it's gonna be extremely difficult.
And now, as I say, using ai, you could have a,
a take down today and
that business could establish a new brand in the market
essentially immediately.
So hence my whack-a-mole analogy.
Mm-hmm. So, and, and just, and we are out of time,
but just to be really clear, is it, is it not impossible
to just ban advertising effectively outright?
I think in the, uh, in, yeah, it's extreme.
Extremely di difficult when these entities are, you know,
all as I say, already advertising.
Okay. Well thank you very much for your time today.
We, we appreciate it. We are moving online now to thank you,
uh, Andrea from Blind Low Vision New Zealand.
Um, you can, uh, turn on your camera and unmute
and you should be with us.
Andrea, can you hear us okay?
Have you unmuted and here we are
Getting there. Fantastic.
No, that's fine. We have until, um,
we're almost 10 minutes, uh, for this time.
Uh, you can take your written submission as read
and maybe leave some time for questions.
Thank you,
Kira. Um, so
Mar, um, my name is Andrea Midn.
I'm the CEO of Blind Low Vision, um, blind, low Vision.
New Zealand is the operating name
of the Royal New Zealand Foundation of the Blind.
Our organization is, uh, over 130 years old.
Um, we're a motivated, full purpose organization guided
by our missions, values, and strategic plan.
We exist, um, to empower approximately 16,000 clients
who are blind, deaf-blind
or low vision to live the life they choose.
We estimate that 193,000 New Zealanders live
with vision loss and could expect that number to grow
to 225,000 by 2028.
Some of the common eye conditions that we, uh, deal
with is our age related macular degeneration,
diabetic re retinopathy, glaucoma, and cataracts.
And with our aging population, this is going to increase.
We were alerted to this bill, um,
from the Asthma New Zealand, um, foundation.
And the major concern that all charities have
with this bill is that inconsistency
with the gambling Act 2003,
the main act makes it mandatory that funds raised
through gambling must be returned to the community.
So for example, for blind low vision
for the financial year 2025, we received a total
of 132,000 in grants from gaming trusts.
This equates to 17% of the total grants income received
for the year, excluding government grants.
These, uh, funds have been used to support
absolutely essential, uh, projects
and services for our blind, deaf-blind
and low vision community.
Examples are vehicles, operational costs,
key audio equipment that, uh, ensures accessibility
for our deaf-blind clients, accessible equipment for people
with low vision to support
our nationwide community engagement initiative.
Translation costs of our, um, uh, costs
for spreading awareness of the blind.
Low vision services supported a kids camp for young blind
and low vision clients
and, um, Alexa devices so
that they can be involved in community
and social, um, groups.
Some charities funds receive from the gaming trust provide
the consistency of funding for much needed staff
to do the valuable work
that they do in the not-for-profit sector,
and that's supporting the most vulnerable across the motto.
Securing grants can be challenging, especially as the need
for support for the not-for-profit
and charity sector increase increases.
There are times when grant applications from gaming trust
are declined due to insufficient funds
if the current wording of the bill is not changed.
This will result in less of a pool of funds being available,
and it's exacerbated
by the tough economic times when other fundraising
initiatives are struggling as well.
Gaming trust income is an important
and reliable source of income for blind low vision,
and without it, the government will need to step up
to fill the gap that we cannot fill.
Blind. Low Vision has strong relationships with several
of the gaming trusts across the country
who support our values
and the value we add to the people's lives
by providing timely funding opportunities, especially
for specialized project work.
If the online gambling bill continues,
it is currently drafted, the potential 15 licenses
that can be granted will not reflect current legislation
providing gambling grants.
It'll have an absolute detrimental effect,
not only on the ability
and capacity of blind low vision to continue IT services,
but also all other charities
and not-for-profit organizations.
Shifting gambling away from physical being used
to online platforms must not be an excuse
to remove the obligations
to return profits back to the community.
One of the tangible ways of being able to ensure support
directly, um, where it will have the greatest impact is
through the gambling grants that fund key projects.
These grants directly fund services
and improve independence, social connection,
and participation in work and education.
For people who are blind, deaf, blind
or have low vision, without these grants, we would be forced
to reduce our services or reduce the reach of our services.
So in conclusion, the bill cannot be allowed to pass
through the house with the inconsistency found
between the amending bill
and the Gambling Act 2003 requiring funding
to be returned to the community.
The not-for-profit sector requires access
to reliable funding to continue to be able
to support New Zealanders in their moment of need.
Ki
Kira, thank you, uh, so much for, um, for that.
I'm just looking around to see, um,
if there are any questions.
It doesn't appear to be thank you.
I think that's been really clear
and also that just that some
of the information your rest on I found really helpful.
So thank you for taking the time to speak to us today.
Thank you. Have a good day.
And have we got, uh,
up in North Island Special Olympics online, so we will move
to that with Lauren.
Apologize if I pronounced that wrong.
I just, the calling of the, so, um, if you can hear us, uh,
is it Lauren from Special Olympics?
Thank you. Um, up in North Island.
Could you just accept the request on Zoom
to be promoted to a panelist?
We just mean that we can, uh, hear you and see you.
Great. Welcome.
Uh, thank you for joining us today.
We've got 10 minutes for your submission.
Um, you might like to leave some time
for questions at the end
and you can take your written submission
as read. It's all yours.
Thank you. Good morning.
My name is Reine Lang
and I'm deputy chair person
of Special Olympics up in North Island Trust
and chairperson of Special Olympics Har Packing a
club in East Auckland.
Special Olympics provide sporting opportunities throughout
New Zealand for intellectually disabled people of all ages,
ethnicities, and abilities.
The four, there are 43 clubs throughout the country.
13 of those clubs are in the upper North Island region
and they are represented on the Upper North Island Trust
Board, which meets quarterly and amongst other things.
It runs Snow Sports as a regional sport project open
to all athletes in the region.
The board applies for gaming trust, funding
for regular snow sport training sessions
and for the annual on Mountain
Snow Training Camp Week at Cardona
or Snow Sports Coaching is provided by volunteers.
Special Olympics clubs themselves provide multi-sport
programs, which are run entirely by volunteers, many caring
for an intellectually disabled family member themselves.
Athlete members are able
to participate in weekly training sessions in their chosen
sports plus regular competition in local
and re regional events leading to qualified application
to enter four year league national games
and ultimately nomination for the Pinnacle World Games.
Through Special Olympics, athletes become better members
of the wider community and they
and their families benefit from the club's.
Informal support networks, the majority
of our athletes exist solely on their supported living
benefit, leaving very little
for spending on anything apart from essential living costs.
Many live in residential care facilities
and Special Olympics activities are the
highlight of their week.
Regular sporting activities lead
to improved health and general wellbeing.
Clubs do not charge membership fees
and try not to charge fees for training sessions.
Venue hire wherever possible, they cover all
or part of the costs of the venue hire so that any person
with an intellectual disability has every opportunity
to be included through the power of sport.
Athletes achieve at their own level, learn skills,
become fitter and healthier,
and get to socialize with their peers.
Gaming trust funding is crucial to the regional trust
and to the 13 Special Olympics clubs in the upper North
Island region as it enables them
to provide essential sports equipment.
Team uniforms, suitable training venues,
subsidized competition entry fees,
subsidized total mobility, transport
and athlete leadership training and opportunities.
The regional trust needs on average $30,000 a year
for snow sports training sessions
and $50,000 a year of gaming trust funding
for the On Mountain Snow camp at car.
How packing a club itself needs on average 30 to $40,000
of gaming trust funding each year towards the running
of the club sports and an additional 80 to $90,000
for the a club team to go
to the national games every four years.
Clubs are already struggling to stay afloat
and with running costs still increasing due to the effects
of inflation, it is getting harder to recruit
and support volunteers as well.
If class four grant funding dries up without being replaced,
the impact of all Special Olympics athletes will be huge,
resulting in many being unable to participate at all.
If we lose gaming trust funding, it is likely that many
of our programs will falter.
This will affect our athletes
and will lead to increased health and fitness issues.
Sustainability of our clubs will be at risk.
During my much of my 35 years
as a Special Olympics volunteer,
I have been involved in applying for
and receiving gaming trust funding, both
for the upper North Island Regional Trust
and for how Packa Club itself.
I have seen the benefits for the regional board
and for Special Olympics clubs and the athletes
and how it has allowed them to develop
to grow athlete numbers
and to strengthen the club infrastructure.
We could not do what would not be able to do
what we do without grant funding.
Therefore, although we agree with the proposed regulation
of online casino gambling, we sincerely urge the government
to include additional legislation to ensure that a share
of legal revenues is allocated to New Zealand C communities,
including all communities support.
Thank you for the opportunities that we give.
Thank you very much for taking the time to share with us.
I do have a question from Celia Wade Brown.
Thank you. And thank you for your work in ensuring
that inclusion of people with special needs in, in sport
and outdoor educ outdoor activity.
I, I just wondered,
and you may not know this, so just in case you happen
to know, um, do you know if people with those special needs,
um, are vulnerable to online gambling themselves?
Um, you mentioned about getting people out from
behind screens and it just occurred to me that they may
also be vulnerable to online gambling.
Yes, it's, it's quite possible that they're,
I dunno of any that are.
Um, but we certainly also do some sort
of oversight things in our work that we do, which, um,
includes safety on online basically
and how to use social media and be careful and all that.
Yes, that they could, they are probably quite vulnerable,
those that can actually operate the computer
and go online easily.
Thank you. Welcome.
Thank you very much for joining us this morning.
We're, um, grateful for your time
and your excellent submission.
Um, and with that we are gonna move on
to the Helberg Foundation.
Welcome, Thomas. We've got, um, 10 minutes set aside for you
and, uh, we can take your written submission as read.
You may like to leave some time for questions,
but I'll let you know when there's
a minute to run. It's all yours.
Yeah. Um, so yeah, obviously if I'm the current C
of the Halberg Foundation should,
should probably also mention, um, for the prior three years
to this role was the National Grant Manager
at the Line Foundation.
So I have extensive experience of working with thousands
of charities across New Zealand who oversee
of Class four game funded.
Um, Halberg known for what it does one night a year,
quite often with the Halberg Awards,
but it should know that 365 days a year halberg is,
is helping young people with disabilities access, sport
and recreation across New Zealand.
Um, and, and Halberg is in receipt of probably, um,
year on year, it differs,
but around 450 to 500,000 uh,
dollars a year from class four gaming funding.
This represents approximately 15% of our income.
Um, so whilst we're not over reliant on gaming funding,
it is a significant proportion of our income
and it's in concern to us that it will be affected
by additional gambling routes.
Of that four to 500,000 a year,
two thirds would go on direct delivery
with the other her third helping us
to cover operational costs,
including things like office rent and utilities,
and actually to what some of the prior
account people I spoke to too.
Um, at Halberg we have a team of eight advisors, um,
full-time and five part-time contracted staff across the
country who are essentially our boots on
the ground in the community.
They connect with over 500 families a year offering funding
support and guidance to access sport and recreation.
We deliver over 180 inclusive training opportunities
to over three and a half thousand teachers, coaches,
or volunteers in sports clubs, schools,
or university settings.
Our team also deliver local
and national events in partnerships with para feds,
regional sports trusts and national sports organizations
from sports as wide as skiing
and surfing to athletics and swimming.
If class four funding was to be impacted,
we would see a significant in reduction in the ability
to be able to serve our community in a community
that is already missing out on sport and rec.
The loss of class four funding,
I would estimate would see a 20
to 25% reduction in our ability to deliver to the community.
That seven 50
to a hundred people less trained in inclusion year on year
and approximately 125 to 150 families
that we'll be unable to connect with.
Young people with disabilities are already half as likely
to participate in sport on a regular basis compared
to their non-disabled peers.
We regularly and often hear
that a child is being told there are health
and safety risk to go on school camp
or that they're asked to keep score
or sent to the library whilst their non-disabled peers
participate in pe.
But yet beyond Halberg disability
and Parasport is a huge beneficiary of Class four funding
the advancement of the lives
of disabled people is a key area in Class four legislation.
And my opinion would be significantly impacted
by the granting of new licenses to private ros
who are not legislated to return to the community.
Bless you too. Thank you.
The Class four system is unique in new, uh, in New Zealand
and a funding system that helps to ensure that those
that may, may miss out have a better chance
to be included in sport and recreation.
I'm fortunate enough to have worked on both sides
of the equator and I'm often asked
by ex colleagues in the UK How's New Zealand to able
to consistently overachieve in sport on the world stage.
I used to answer, it's due to the humble hard work in nature
of Kiwis, the ease of access
to the environment and the outdoors.
And whilst this remains true, I'm more convinced
of this having now spent seven years in New Zealand.
There is also a reality that we have a unique funding system
with class four gaming that lowers the point of entry
for sports providing us with high participation rates
and an extremely active community.
In comparison to the uk currently class four gaming
represents a sunset industry sinking their policies
and ever increasing cash to society.
And with the pros, inclusion
of the new online private providers will, in my opinion,
expedite the eradication of
what is a much needed funding source to the community.
And whilst no alternative exists to replace this funding,
we must speak up to protect it.
Online providers will have the permissions
and means to advertise on tv, social media,
and directly to people's smartphones increasing gaming risk
whilst also taking from the community part.
We're well aware of the risk of gambling and a regulated
and licensed path, one that returns
to the community is surely the best way forward
for AO and New Zealand.
On behalf of the Halberg Foundation,
I'm recommending a solution to the government
to include provision for community funding in the next
version of the OCG bill, we pro,
we pro propose the OCG Act contain the same purpose
statement as the Gambling Act 2003,
which identifies one purpose of an act to ensure
that money from gambling benefits the community.
We urge the committee to reconsider the scope
and direction of this legislation.
Thank you. We appreciate the time to do this verbally today.
Thank you. And, and, and thanks for your submission.
Can I ask one question?
You may have heard my colleague Tom, someone before.
At the moment, um, money that's received
by a Class four trust is
distributed back into the community.
It came from, um, if, if we were to collect all the,
uh, money from online providers, do you have a, uh, just
with your background and both the the Lion Foundation
as well, I wonder if you have an idea of how
that could best be distributed fairly across the communities
that it might have come from?
So the current legislation is
to return the majority from the point of origin.
So what's your definition of majority? 50.01%.
90%, 95% differs per society that's distributed.
So my time at Lion, we endeavor
to return 90% back to point of origin.
Um, but the fact is that you'll have some areas
that generate higher surpluses that then went
to national roots where everyone could benefit.
So first of all, there probably needs to be some, um,
robustness looking, um, looking at at that model.
And then I suppose when you look at end user trusts as well,
so things like, um, well there's, there's certain societies
that only give to certain things, so
that is obviously affected by point of return as well.
So in answer to your question to solve, if you were, um,
putting money into that national pot, you could go
to just national organizations,
but it's local ones that probably need it the most.
Um, I think you could divvy up per capita,
per population and things like that.
I'm sure there's many things you could look at, um,
off the top of head, but it does, it does pose, um,
it does pose a significant, um, problem,
but I think there's probably solutions to it.
The larger problem as well is currently with 35
or 36 class four providers, if there's 15 licenses
and everyone's individually going back,
all you're doing is creating more work for the
28,000 charities in New Zealand.
Right? And you've already spoke to someone earlier that,
you know, these applications take time
and we're sucking time out of the community sector.
What we actually use regulation in the whole sector
and less providers, therefore less
applications and less declines.
It took, it takes societies as long
as a process a decline as it does for success.
We're sucking time outta charities.
Thank you. But, but,
and I guess what I'm hearing from you is, um, better to get
that down to the local level than just
targeting national organizations.
Yeah, absolutely. I mean,
targeting national organizations allows you to, um, to take
that surplus if you can't spend it locally.
Um, you know, yeah, there was areas
where there would always be a big surplus
and, you know, you could put that to a St.
John's a really big good project locally in a
community that can have an impact.
But sometimes there, there just wasn't the charities
or the, I suppose, a charity of, of significance that,
that you would trust to spend the money
well locally as well.
One that isn't as developed.
Um, so there's an argument for both.
But yeah, I think the, the original point
of the actor returns to the point
of generation is probably a really
important thing to consider as well.
Thank you. Pleasure.
Thank you for your time today.
I appreciate you joining us and,
and wish you and Helberg all the best.
Thank you very much. Thanks for the time. Bye-bye.
See you later. And uh, now I think we have
with us in the room.
Is it Lucy? Yes. Welcome.
Would you like to come and come
and take a seat up here, please?
Um, on behalf of clubs New Zealand for those watching along.
Um, so look, the next 10 minutes is all yours.
You can take your written submission.
We've got it here in front of us as read.
Um, I'll let you know when there's a minute
to run. Brilliant. Over,
Over to you. Thank you. Good
morning.
Uh, and thank you for the opportunity to appear today and,
and speak to clubs New Zealand's submission.
Uh, my name is Lucy Waters Chief Executive
of Clubs New Zealand.
Uh, we represent 300 just over 300 clubs across the country.
Uh, they vary in size from, uh, very small, uh,
societies with maybe 15 members who are a collective
of people who, who get together a couple of times a week
through to clubs with an excess of 11,000 members, uh,
providing, uh, exceptional facilities
and hospitality to their communities.
Uh, no matter where a club fits on this scale, though,
they are community spaces where New Zealanders gather
to socialize, play sport, share meals,
and access affordable entertainment.
Uh, approximately half
of our membership operate Class four gaming.
So we are possibly in a unique position
where we've got clubs that are operating machines,
but then clubs that are also benefiting from grants
from Class four gaming.
Uh, so while we welcomed the government's intention
to regulate online gaming, uh,
this bill in its current form,
in our opinion, misses the mark.
Uh, it risks undermining New Zealand's gambling framework,
which is built on harm minimization,
fairness and community benefit.
Uh, and I wanna start with the harm minimization aspect.
Uh, last year I visited every club in the north island
that operates Class four gaming.
Uh, and my colleague did the same in the south island.
And that's part of our commitment, supporting our clubs
that operate, uh, gaming.
We provide training to the staff, we check compliance
with the regulations and,
and just provide general support to them.
Uh, the club staff are trained
to recognize the signs of harm.
They know their members by name
and they notice when things change.
Uh, so one story that, that sticks
with me from my time on the road was of an older gentleman.
He was a member of the club
and he would visit couple of times a week, once or twice,
and he'd play a small amount on the gaming machines.
A staff member, uh, noticed that he began coming in more.
So instead of two times a week, it was four times a week.
And this raised concerns, uh, they discussed it
with the manager who subsequently sat down with him.
Turned out he had lost his wife 12 months prior.
Uh, while he had support.
At first, uh, people naturally go back to their routines.
That support network failed and he was lonely.
He turned pokey machines as a, as a distraction.
But 'cause the staff noticed they were able
to step in early, they put supports around him
and he was able to manage his gaming safely.
That type of intervention, I,
I believe is only possible in a face-to-face setting.
Uh, it simply cannot be replicated online no matter
how good the intentions or the technology.
Uh, I can also count more than a few times when staff
members had to step in, uh, with a player
that was showing signs of harm only to see
that person pull out their phone
and continue gambling online.
The harm from online gambling is here now.
Um, it is, it exists right now.
Uh, class four gaming is highly regulated.
And the reason for this is that, is it, it's, it's
to prevent and minimize the harm from gambling.
Uh, as I've said, staff must complete training annually.
They must complete physical walkthroughs
of the gambling area three times in an hour.
They are looking for signs of harm,
they're making robust records,
and they're observing that, that
and having player interactions.
Uh, we've heard that this bill proposes
to allow licensed online providers
to advertise directly to New Zealanders.
However, our clubs are inspected to make sure that, uh,
even a glimpse of a gaming machine cannot be
seen from outside the venue.
Credit betting is prohibited in New Zealand
yet this bill will allow New Zealanders
to access online casinos with their credit cards.
Strict standards apply to how much,
how many machines a venue can have.
Those machines undergo extensive testing require approval
before they can be bought into New Zealand.
This bill will allow, on the other hand, allow a myriad
of games available anywhere, anytime, 24 7.
Uh, and I'm sure you've also heard concerns, uh, raised
around the potential for kiosks to be placed in,
in various places that allow access to online gaming.
This is obviously not a level playing field
for our land base gaming operators.
Uh, the second and very large concern
that our members have expressed and,
and is obviously being expressed, uh, in a number
of submissions is the lack of return to community.
Uh, currently every form
of gambling in New Zealand from your Sunday meet raffle
through to your class wall gaming room requires proceeds
to go back to the community and clubs.
It's a minimum of 37 1 0.2%, um, return
to authorized purposes,
that money from sports uniform travel
for sports team welfare support for club members, uh,
Anzac Day commemorations, the maintenance
of the club facilities,
which obviously benefits the community.
Um, we often talk about the fact that that gaming
and clubs is the, it's the purest form of return
to the local community.
Uh, because the, the club is either applying the funds
to itself or it's distributing to, to, um,
groups that are within the local area.
Uh, this bill proposes no reinvestment requirement at all.
Instead, it creates a system where profits flow offshore
or into private hands.
And this creates an unlevel playing field for our clubs
who are already meeting strict compliance obligations while
still giving back to the communities.
Uh, and it's not just the clubs
with gaming machines who are at risk.
Uh, many of our smaller
or rural, rural clubs rely on the grants from class four
gaming societies to survive.
Uh, if this bill passes in its current form,
the entire ecosystem of community funding will be weakened.
Uh, if the government is going to regulate online gaming,
it is our belief that it must be consistent
with the gambling Act 2003.
That means there must be a mandatory return to community
and harm minimization obligations
that are at least equivalent to those of
Nonino Class four operators.
Uh, without these protections,
this bill will increase gambling harm,
reduce community funding,
and undermine the longstanding balance
that New Zealand has worked so hard to achieve. Thank you.
Thank you, Lucy. Um, fantastic.
I know Silly way Brown. Like to
Thank you. Thank you, Lucy.
And thank you for the work your clubs do.
Um, you say that, um,
obviously you're not happy with this bill.
Mm-hmm. Um, at the moment, while it's illegal
for a New Zealand operator to run online gambling mm-hmm.
It's not illegal for one of us to gamble off online.
Correct. Offshore.
So given that that's, if you like,
even worse from a point of view of harm minimization,
there's certainly no money flowing into New Zealand from it.
What would you suggest needs to be done
to stop that? Um,
There, there are certainly
solutions that are being looked.
I mean, that's always one of those really hard things you
can put in place all kinds of blocks
to sites and, and things like that.
But people find a workaround.
Uh, I know in Australia they have, um, put in place measures
to block people accessing online casinos using credit cards.
That is a, a, a
nationwide approach that they're taking.
That's interesting. Okay. La
Thank you. Probably supplement
you from that.
Um, and you've really clearly highlighted
what happens in person
and all the measures you've put
in place across your three and club.
That's really helpful to understand.
Just thinking in terms of the practicality of online.
Mm-hmm. Um, have your staff thought
of any measures that would be quite practical, uh,
particularly with the cases like the gentleman that you
identified, um, without that practical support,
It, it is really, yeah.
It's really difficult.
And as I said, there are people
that are experiencing harm from online gaming right now.
And so when they're in a, a club setting and,
and a staff member becomes aware of it, they, they are feel,
while, while there's nothing in the regulations,
they are feeling obligated
to support this person once they become, um, aware.
So they're having conversations, they're intervening, um,
but they are limited in, in what they can put in place when,
when someone is experiencing online harm.
So, uh, they, they tend to follow the path
that they do currently in terms of referring to, um,
support providers.
Um, but there is, they are limited in
what they can physically do to support those people. Thank
You.
Thank you very much for your time, Lucy.
We appreciate you joining us today.
Um, members, we're gonna take a short break
and then we are back for another, uh, three hours.
So 10 0 5?
Yeah. Yeah.
Okay. And welcome with that, we are gonna start. Yes.
Uh, thank you for joining us. Um, was it Jim? Yes.
Yep. And we appreciate you taking the time.
You've got 10 minutes for your submission.
Uh, leave some time for questions.
We'll take the written one as read
and I'll let you know when there's a minute to run.
But the floor is yours.
Thank you. Good morning.
Just briefly, I'd like to talk about our club,
uh, and our community.
Um, our club exists to enrich the lives of people
with intellectual disability through sport.
So although we're classified as a sporting organization,
really what we do is help our people develop life skills.
And we do that because they face unusual challenges.
They might not be used to wearing a uniform,
they might never have traveled with a team.
They have never competed in an unfamiliar venue.
And so we provide opportunities on the counterside.
We provide positive opportunities
how they can help themselves through
presenting themselves when we are raising funds, um,
volunteering with organizations to raise funds.
They work admittedly in small temporary jobs
with local employers,
but they're all known throughout our community.
So our community's very important to us.
We have excellent communi connections
with our local community that offer day-to-day funding
benefits in kind as a source of volunteers,
but it's our wider community in our region
and neighboring regions.
That helps by providing us
with opportunities for competition.
And so from our perspective, it's essential
that all our communities are maintained and funded.
And so that leads to my personal possession on the bill,
is that if the land-based gambling is regulated
by government to reduce the risk of harm
to protect consumers
and maximize the benefit to communities,
I believe the online gambling should reflect
those same principles.
Thank you.
Thank you, uh, very much. That's very clear.
I think for us, I'll just see if there are any
questions from other members.
Um, can I just ask one question if that's okay, Jim,
when you say they should be regulated the same way, is that,
um, with reference to returning that, um, community funding,
the sort of the same percentage?
Is that what you would be advocating
for or something different?
Um,
I, I don't, I don't have a perfect view
of the potential market for online
and, um, land-based gambling,
but I think New Zealand as one large community
benefits from the monies that they receive.
So I would very much like to ensure that the,
that fund keeps paying
and is in pace with change.
Uh, we, we, there are so many other pressures impacting, uh,
lack of volunteers costs.
Clubs are already seeing, uh,
funding much more difficult to achieve.
And I know their grants, I know they've donations,
but, um,
if you've got a weak community, uh,
all the pockets start emptying very quickly.
Mm, thank you.
And, and thank you very much for taking the time to join us.
We appreciate it. Um, we're gonna move on
to our next submission now, which will be from, uh,
Fruitvale School who are also joining us online.
We'll just give them a minute to get their camera on
and you should be able to turn on your camera
and microphone now.
Uh, thank you for joining us.
Um, there's 10 minutes set aside for your submission
and you can take your written one that we've got in front
of us as red, but we'll, um, you might like
to leave some time for questions at the end.
The floor is all yours.
Sure. Uh, the Honorable Select Committee.
I'm speaking on behalf of many schools in my capacity
as a primary school principal.
I have also in the recent past been president for my sins
of a large group of principles in w Auckland.
I'm against the growing industry of online gambling
and don't think it is needed or desirable.
And I will outline some major reasons why in
my submission today.
So just some background.
My school is home to 7,370 children in waves of generations
as the school works alongside Tam, who are forever faces
that we get to know very well over our six years with them.
And they are in turn replaced by another three 70
or more every six years as they become 10, 11 year olds
and move up to intermediate and then secondary levels.
In my 18 years at the school,
they personally worked with over a thousand tam.
I understand what motivates them
and I believe I see in a young form
what they will become as adults.
Primary schooling is a very impactful time in both tam's
lives, but also in the lives of their whanau.
I'm seeing the changes in society
before that society emerges fully as the sins
of the fathers are visited on the sons and daughters.
I'm also witnessing the very cool times in a public
institution, our school, the interface of government policy
where your policies hit the road.
I see the uptake in practice of values
and the growth of ability for children to learn to relate
and treat their fellow with respect and dignity
'cause of they the way they are treated
and, uh, they the way they are treated and heard.
So I am witness to the greatest
and the worst of society in how poverty, abuse,
violence from drugs, alcohol
and gambling is experienced at a very young age.
I also see the redemption that's possible
when adults are able to get alongside the tamana
and grow people into the persons they can be.
I have a pretty privileged job
that I love and that's why I'm here.
If there is a good side to the gambling industry,
we get the best side of gambling in that.
Currently all gambling trusts, which are all gambling,
lounge gaming lounges must belong to a, have to give back
to communities that they work with.
And amongst 300 million million annually
of an $830 million industry, it's about 40%.
In my school, this has meant numerous opportunities
to benefit the tam we work with.
We have been able to create an awesome bike track,
which means Toki get outdoors, learn the freedom
of personal transport as they get on their first bike.
Often they learn the road rules about sharing space.
They get to ride through Bush
and around cool curves as they get better
and better at the skill of riding.
They learn the benefits of maintenance
and storage for bikes
that now we have had for close to 10 years.
And each generation of children get to use a great
maintained set of machines just for them.
We have put a rubber skin in our swim pool, which has meant
that we no longer have to apply every couple of years
to repaint an aging surface
and maintain a perfect order,
a very maintenance heavy asset.
So children learn about the joy of water.
They get to learn how to swim and so be safe
and water for themselves
and with others as they enjoy the pool.
Sometimes with a hundred children alongside them
as they enjoy a carnival atmosphere,
they get called in the best way.
In the heat of summer, they learn about
how you take care of yourself.
In the sun slips lot splash.
They learn to compete and win an ability to lose well.
They learn what the benefits of community are
when things you can't buy or maintain yourself are
provided for you at your local loving school.
Courtesy of the government and communities of many days.
The great thing about this rubber surface, it is soft
and last many, many years, 30 plus.
So it preserves this asset for a very long time.
Beyond my years at the school, we have asked you to services
that allow kids to get an awesome experience
of great services for sport and games.
This is a sporting asset as well
as visually aesthetic asset.
And we're able to bring many games
and so much fun to the tamony learning.
We have a hall that needs maintaining
and the flaws that have been surfaced in the sound
and light that has been enhanced through funds.
One in the competitive pool of the gambling trusts, we have
to prove ourselves worthy and put a case.
And this can take a lot of energy, disappointment, often,
and joy when we get through to the application gate.
These are benefits that would stretch my low midal community
or mid equity index populations.
And as a result of my budget, we don't have the benefit
of being able to charge fees
'cause my community is already stretched
by the increasing cost of living,
particularly under this government.
But under all governments previously,
poverty is the greatest cause of disease, crime, hunger,
homelessness, violence and underachievement gambling.
While enjoyed by many
and many, many forms, the biggest losers are the poor.
Do we need a new form of gambling? I don't think so.
Do we need one that's un unregulated? Absolutely not.
Do we need the best of a bad lot? Why wouldn't we?
So my submission is ban the online gambling if you can.
And it seems you can because you're able to limit
who participates so I not ban them.
Anyone will be able to access them.
It happens with porn warnings and asking for age
and gender are very weak.
So weak as to be meaningless.
Controls just about every child of 8, 9, 10 years of age has
or has easy access to online spaces
Already in the last few weeks,
I'm noticing online gambling creeping into
all my communication apps.
No one in the online world can cry. Poor.
And one of the biggest commercial spaces ever in the history
of the world has
so much been made available at the touch of a few buttons.
Online spaces are addictive. I know it, you will too.
The little dopamine hit every time you buy something on
Temu, the little dopamine hit every time you get a like
or another follower to your latest post on Facebook.
Insta and so many other comms portals, this needs regulation
and this space needs to pay back, face-to-face.
Human selling of lotto tickets, pokies, horses,
raffle tickets, and so many other forms proliferate.
They all have in common that someone, an adult needs
to make the choice to sell to underage buyers.
That adult hopefully has some values
and ultimately can be held to account if they do not.
If they do sell to miners, online gambling is not going
to have this very powerful gatekeeping facility.
Letting online gambling get away
with a virtual dopamine in heaven,
wreaking havoc in our communities
and not asking for recompense as ludicrous.
Any online facility must give back.
The pub raffle builds the rugby club.
The pokies add to community facilities that
otherwise wouldn't have.
The horses are an industry that is built on skill
and great knowledge of animals and pays back
and facilities jobs a night out in community.
My first very strong recommendation is
that online gambling should be either prevented
and we know it's possible
or made to share a large portion
of the gains made by writing into law.
The online gambling industry needs
to give back at least 40%.
You are doing your jobs as public servants working
to create and sustain a culture.
You and I and all the Tam Wau I work with.
And for for ca
and for can be proud of, I urge the select committee
to consider the following recommendations.
Mandatory community funding contribution.
We request that bill be amended
to include a mandatory requirement
for all online casino licensees
to contribute a meaningful percentage of their gross profits
to a dedicated community funding pool.
A localized distribution distribution model.
The bill should establish a mechanism to ensure
that these new funds are distributed on a regional
or local basis, mirroring the con current system.
This will prevent the centralization of funds
and ensure that local communities continue
to benefit from gambling that occurs within the area.
Ringfence, the funding
and any new funding stream should be specifically allocated
to a fund for schools, sports clubs,
and other community groups protecting it from being absorbed
into general government revenue.
These are my submissions
and thank you to the select committee
for the time through any questions?
I'm happy to try and answer them.
Thank you very much. We've got two questions we're gonna
try and squeeze into the next minute and a half.
So, uh, LA and Lydia. Thank
You. Uh, your
submission is very clear.
Uh, as Toki uh, do you have a number in terms
of operators?
'cause it's a go. The bill allows up to 15.
Do you have a number in mind that you would recommend?
Yeah, zero. Okay. Thank you. Thank you.
Cindy Brown. Yeah, it was very similar in
that you think that we should ban online gambling
because of the harm.
It does not. And it's,
and if we were to have any,
there should be some proportion put aside for the community.
Is that Yeah.
Fair? Yes, absolutely.
I mean, um, I know that it's out there
and it needs to be regulated,
but um, if it's, if it can be regulated
and you can limit it to 15, why can you not limit it
to two or three or none?
I mean, going back to the former question, sorry.
But, um, yeah, I think, um, it's just too easy for kids
to access regardless.
I don't know what sort of control you
could put in there to stop them.
Thank, thank you. We are out of time there,
so I'll save, um, Mr.
Rutherford's question for later.
But, um, appreciate you joining us today and,
and all the best to the whole team at Fruitvale School.
Um, and with that we are moving to the Bay of Plenty
Badminton Association.
Um, thanks for joining us.
Uh, we've got 10 minutes for you, so, um, you might like
to leave some time for questions
and I'll let you know when there's a minute to learn.
It's all yours.
Excellent. Thank you. Thank you very much.
And, uh, thank you very much for the opportunity.
My name's Darwin Cooper. I'm
with Bay Plenty Badminton Association.
I'm the community development general manager.
So, um, my role in here is to, uh, develop, um,
the community around us, the clubs, the schools, uh,
all those sorts of things, um,
for badminton across our region.
And, um, I think, uh, we would have some of the, some
of the richest people that live in our community,
but also some of the poorest
that live across the bay are plenty, uh,
um, in, in the country.
And, um, the amount of funding
and stuff that we, we get, um, uh, uh, is so necessary, um,
from the gaming trusts, uh,
'cause it actually funds a lot of the salaries
and stuff that we have for our organization to be able
to do the work that we do in our
community and with our schools.
Um, so for me it's, um,
we, we already have a portion of online gambling with TAB
and Lotto, uh, in that respect.
Um, and they give back.
And what I would, what I would say is that
while online gambling, um, can be hard
and we regulate at the moment for an,
for a sinking lid policy so that we can kind of
minimize harm in a lot of the communities around the areas,
um, that money does go back into the,
into the community that it's coming out of.
And it's really important.
Um, and it, it helps so many people.
Um, the last submitter was talking about, you know, all the,
all the things that they have in their community
that have been gained from the grants that they've received.
Um, and, and it is, it's, it's, that's not just the things,
but it's actually the community that is brought together
as well and the people that, that, uh, build resilience
with sport, all those sorts of things.
So my, my submission would be that, you know, have,
you can have on lamb gambling, there's gotta be some sort
of good regulations around it so that again, yes,
it doesn't affect, um, children so much.
I do believe in personal responsibility.
I think that sometimes we regulate too much
for the minority, um, in our country,
but that's a personal view.
But I would like to see that this online gambling does have,
um, it must have a proportion
that comes back into the community, uh, just like the other,
um, the other gaming machines, um, have
otherwise I think that, uh, you're going to end up
with people online all the time
and you're gonna lose out
with having people in using those gaming rooms
and our funding will disappear.
Totally. And there's no other kind
of structure available in the country
to actually help develop and help sustain
and help the programs
that are put forward into our communities that,
that money funds.
Um, so that, that's, it's just super important that that,
that if this goes ahead,
that it is on the level playing field to those
that are in the, um, in the gaming rooms.
Um, that, that's, that was really my submission
and just the concern that we have, um, for that. Thank
You. Thank you
very much. If you're happy to take a,
a question I'll, um, ask Tom Ruthford,
Hey Dar, thank you for your, uh, submission on this.
Um, uh, I'm supportive of the view that you've shared around
ensuring there's an element of it
that goes back into community funding similar to what we see
with Class four at the moment.
Yes. Do you think it should be the same percentage
for online gambling as is the case
for class four at the moment
that goes back into the community?
Yes, I do. And do you, would you have in mind
how a mechanism would work for that?
Uh, do you think it should I ultimately understand
that's our responsibility,
but keen to understand from you
how you think it would work best for you?
I think that maybe it has to go into a pool, um, you know,
it gets, it, it goes into a national pool
and then it has to then feed down
and maybe it's based on population basis of the regions.
So do you think, um, you know, if you have, um, uh,
you know, Ong say
or Rotar, I know that in our region, um, 53%
of the population live in toga compared
to 22 in Whakatane region.
Do you know those? So perhaps that's,
that can be the mechanism that is used
and it goes into the pool nationally,
and then it's split down by population basis, uh,
into the different regions.
So obviously Auckland's a big region
that could be split into north, south, east, west, um,
tower, the Bay plenty could be split into
Eastern Central and Western.
So then you've got a bigger pool in the areas that go to,
um, the, where the population is.
Yeah, well, I agree with you Dewin.
Toga is a wonderful place to live.
Um, but I would, uh, I would also ask around whether, uh,
it should, the funding should be returned
to the region in which it was collected. So yes,
So I suppose it just comes down to how well you can gen
how, how well your technology can can do that.
And if that's that, if that's the way it needs to be,
then that's the way it needs to be.
But I was just thinking if they, if it's, they must be able
to do something, but I mean, if people are traveling,
how do they, I don't know how all the technology will work,
but surely there must be some very clever people that will,
will, will be able to do that side of it.
But I, you know, if if it can't work that way, then maybe
that's another option of doing it.
Thank you very much, much
And thank you very much for your time and, uh, wish you
and the association all the best. Thank
You very much.
We are now gonna move to Stokes Valley Football Club
and I think they might be here in the room.
Yeah, welcome. Don't look like
I'm in a football club, do I?
We make no assumptions On this committee.
Oh, right, okay. Well that's
All right. Um, well look,
it's great to have you in the room with us.
So, uh, look, 10 minutes set aside for you. All good.
And um, we've got your written
submission, but floor's, yours.
Excellent, thank you. So Kira and good morning.
My name is Casey Diver and I'm the president
and representative today on behalf of my football club,
which is Stoke.
It's based out here in Lower Heart.
I'm happy to answer any questions
regarding the details outlined in our submission at the end
and I encourage this committee to answer, ask such questions
regarding the impact of the community funding
on our organization and the positive benefits it has had.
However, before I do that, I would like to address some
of the concepts that permeated through the submissions
to this committee as I have been watching over the last
several days, but have potentially been overlooked
or underdressed.
They're the concepts and by and I
and by extension my club know well.
And that is the concepts of Compromise and Sacrifice.
Being a community volunteer is ably ties to these concepts.
We sacrifice our time, our resources,
and our skills to make our own organization
as successful as it is.
Football is the fastest growing sport in this
country currently.
Our club would be a prime example of that.
Within five years, we've grown from an active membership
of 200 to over 600 active members, excluding former members
and volunteers triple in some less than five years,
despite the challenges that COVID has brought us.
And despite the challenges of community funding,
now we can tie that down to a variety
of factors including housing intensification in our area,
the um, FIFA Women's World Cup
and the interest that's brought across the country.
And also funding tools that have encouraged more children
and people to have more access to sports like football.
But I'm not here to debate those
because that would be a very time consuming
and very technical conversation to have.
But titles mean nothing at Ad Club.
Myself, for example, being the president.
Being a president often means a ceremonial role with a,
with within the hierarchical structure,
but you could not be further from the truth for six months.
Every weekend I wake up at 6:00 AM
and I'm down at my club rooms
before 9:00 AM cleaning, vacuuming,
and ensuring the club rooms are ready to go for our juniors
and for our senior weekend football activities.
Our club is fortunate to be one of the few still
that still owns its own building
and have been able to maintain our history in
our identity as a result.
From there I shuttle myself to referee college football
as our club partners with schools
and now our local college
to bring football back into schools.
We have been using our own equipment, our own coaches
and our own resources to ensure
that this project kicks off within the college, um,
which has not had a football team in over 10 years.
From there I shuttle myself back to our club rooms
to play 90 minutes and then to referee further 90 minutes
of Master's men's football.
And if any of you have ever watched Master's Men's football,
you know that that is a very difficult thing to do,
especially for someone my age as I'm not a master's player
to referee or play to referee.
Oh yeah, playing is easy. Refereeing is hard.
Yeah, good luck. After that, I repeat the process,
clean the club club rooms in the evening
and gearing up for women's football on Sunday,
which I will often be called to referee those games too,
which are again a completely different kettle of fish.
My fiance often has said that in winter everyone sees me
but her and this year she has joined our club
as its secretary, another sacrifice made in the
name of community sport.
This is just a brief example of what I do for my club
and I've missed many things including grant funding,
networking, and even making submissions
before committees such as this.
But as I've described more than I think is enough.
There are about over 20 community volunteers within our club
that do the same level of tasks that I do.
Community organizations are a full-time responsibility
regardless of what you believe when
you are signing up for them.
Mm-hmm Every day there is a new form of administrative
or technical crisis that needs to be collectively addressed
and resolved in order for the club to function.
Normally members never know the full extent of the work done
and the time taken by people in the name of the community
and by extension of the club.
They understand that the task is a hard one,
that running an organization where you,
where your time is treated as infinite, that is unpaid
and demanding, never ever ends
because we are not there for ourselves.
But to continue what generations of volunteers have done
before us to deliver a needed
and desired service to the community.
As outlined in this submission
and in many submissions already made,
community funding is a mechanism by which we can use
to deliver those services.
It is by its nature and perfect difficult
and can be often archaic and time consuming.
Decades ago, poker machines
with a new frontier in community funding
and it took the government significant time to legislate
and regulate them in a way
that maximized their community benefit.
Online gambling is that next frontier
and rather than wait for years
and to see the real cost of not creating a compromise now
that ensures community funding isn't protected
and enhanced, this committee should compromise
and by extension make the sacrifice
and recommend including a community funding mechanism into
any new legislation that, um, regulates
or legislates online gambling in New Zealand.
Regardless of the decision made, it will never be enough.
That is the modern reality
of community organizations in New Zealand.
Regardless of the sport code organization
or particular interest, whether it be from food banks
to poverty relieving services,
the money will never be enough.
The time volunteers put in will never be enough.
The services we provide
and will continue to provide for as long as we are able
will never be enough
because the need will only continue to grow
as is in the case of sport, uh, football
or in the case of any other new sport
or community concept that is a high use,
high needs membership model.
Community funding is a sacrifice, a compromise
because a better system
of one such exists has not been implemented despite at least
two decades of community funding being
regulated under pokey machines.
Local government policy has limited its ability to expand
through sinking LID policies and other such restrictions
or outright refusing
to introduce community funding mechanisms,
especially in cases
for sport codes which are already
disadvantaged in that space.
Central government likewise,
while offering community funding models
through organizations like the Department
of Internal Affairs has restricted its criteria
where sports are often excluded and when they are included
and when they are included, the available funds are so small
and the administrative demands to attempt to apply for them
so high that many organizations
that are run entirely on volunteers such as myself
that lack the skills to know how to apply
for community funding alone do not apply.
A perfect system does not exist.
A better system can exist,
but it must be built through compromise and sacrifice
and in an awareness of the actual day-to-day realities
of organizations that organizations go through, not just
to grow but to function in a most basic sense.
And that's me done.
Thank you, uh, very much.
We've got just a couple of minutes.
I'm gonna try and get two questions in Tom rather fit in
Elia, I apologize.
I was trying to go as fast as I can. It's
Great, Tom. Hey
Casey. Firstly, just thank you for what people like you
and others do across the country, uh,
at Cricket for a local cricket club.
And we can't do
what we do without people like you who give up their time.
So firstly, thank you for, for doing that all off the bat.
I'd say to your fiance that her joining
as secretary just means your meetings are date nights.
You get to spend more time together.
Well, two and a half hour date nights.
Yeah, they're, they're pretty extensive.
She built us a whole new website, new registration system,
all new built entire new systems so
that I never would've been able to do.
None of us would've been able to do.
So it's nice having a woman in the
club. I'm very glad to marry
Marrying her. That's
a good decision. My, my question would be,
can you tell the committee, uh,
if the class four funding you currently receive at Stokes
Valley was to disappear, how much would you have
to increase your player fees by,
Um, at least well outlined in the submission.
I did make, I did make some estimations
based on the statistical figures,
the financial figures that we had.
But we would look, be looking about increasing to about
450, $500.
Mm-hmm. Per player. Per player up from about 310. So you're
Looking to 800, close to a thousand. Yeah.
And, um, in an area such as Australia, I'm not,
I dunno if you're aware of the area
or like the dynamics in that area, the chances
of us continuing to grow
or continue to exist under our current player base.
A lot of players, they just wouldn't do it. Mm-hmm.
They wouldn't participate mm-hmm.
At all in sport
because if clubs create financial barriers
to entering into sport,
how is the next generation ever gonna
want to be involved in that?
Likewise, for our juniors, we started five years ago
with about a hundred and a hundred juniors in our club.
We now have over 350.
We have 350, sorry, we have 350
because the financial measures we put in place,
balance out the books so that we can encourage those people
to join without discouraging them
through financial means. And
I'm, I'm sorry to rush you,
but I just wanna see if we can squeeze in a short question.
Thank you much. And again, thank you for
what my sons both played football, so not in Stokes Valley,
but not too far away.
Um, I really want to go to the beginning of your submission
where you say it's an unfortunate and preventable reality.
Um, so you would prefer it if you didn't have
to rely on any kind of gambling,
whether it's task four or online.
My personal position or my club's position.
Well give us both. Oh, my personal position is
that it is an imperfect system.
It's been created to fill a gap.
That gap is continuing to wide with
that system has not been altered.
That system is not going to be sustainable in the long term.
So a new system has to start being built to replace it
as opposed to the now.
Um, we are in an area where we are already limited in terms
of fast four machine areas 'cause we've only got one area.
Um, so while I would, I would love to have access to more
so that we can do more.
I'm keenly aware that that's not a possibility,
nor do I wish it on the community in the long run
because while gambling it is a, it's an activity.
I recognize that it does have some human costs to it,
but as I said, it's about compromise
and it's about trying to find that balance. Thank
You. Thank you. That's
exactly where you, where you started.
So I way to finish.
Appreciate your time and all good for you to,
we will move please.
Celia, we will move on to, um, Nana Park Golf
Sanctuary. Yes.
Hi. That is a sanctuary.
Uh, is it, uh, Dr. Anne? Yes. Please join us.
We, um, 10 minutes set aside for you
and you may like to leave some time for questions as well.
Course. Okay. Yeah, that's you. You're welcome to vote.
Come and join us at the table.
Be be be nice to acknowledge you
as well. Um, time's all yours.
Okay. Ana Koto.
Um, thank you for the opportunity
to speak today on the online casino gambling bill.
I'm Anne Alma, the president of Mana Park Golf Club and with
and supporters Graham Bennett, the club Captain
Mana Park Golf Course.
Golf Club is one of 27 clubs across the region
and we have 700 members aged from under 20
to over 90 and withdraw from all of the regions
on behalf of the club.
I'm asking the select committee to consider a refinement
to the online casino gambling bill.
This is the chance to embed in the bill the same purpose
from the gambling Act 2003, namely purpose G to ensure
that money from gambling benefits the community.
The new bill is regulatory and intent,
and we understand the need for this.
It'll generate revenue for government and profits for on
and offshore license holders.
However, clubs
and communities will be the losers in the longer term given
the evidence you earned on Monday.
That class four gambling revenues are decreasing
as the uptake of online gambling increases.
So why does our club want the bill
to ensure money from gambling benefits the community
in short, because sport needs to be accessible
to all players and potential players
regardless of their circumstances.
At the heart of this is the principle of equity
and anecdotes and research show the value
of participation and belonging.
Research in Oura shows that for young people, regular
participation in sport, particularly team sport is
associated with improved social skills, social integration,
competence, cooperation and teamwork.
Older people also benefit the research shows for adults.
Sport and physical activity has been associated
with indicators of better mental wellbeing, such
as happiness, self-esteem, and cognitive development.
Yes, old people can still develop cognitive apparently.
Yay. Put simply the research
and along with what we see on a weekly basis at our club,
tell us that belonging to a club
and participating in sport create happier, healthier people,
better connected communities
and to stronger out to Aurora New Zealand.
But belonging and participating costs, people
clubs provide opportunities for participation.
And the cost of parti participation needs to be such
that it is accessible to all, not only the privileged few
who can afford to pay for the privilege.
We are mindful that the practical realities
of affordability persist as a barrier
for many individuals and families.
This limits participation and widens inequality.
You'll have seen in our written submission
that we did not raise our subscriptions for four years
and have a number of membership options
to ensure golf at Manor Park is accessible to
as many people as possible.
But running a club costs money, providing services
and amenities means clubs such
as Manor Park are essentially not for loss businesses.
We run, maintain, and renew land buildings and equipment.
We employ staff to provide green keeping administrative
and retail services.
All of this costs money, not all of which can be covered
by subscriptions, green fees and sponsorship.
As an example, we need to replace our club Clubhouse roof.
It's a large house. And while we have been judicious in our
asset management planning processes, recent quotes indicate
that most of the money that we've allocated for this year,
this year's projects are likely
to be spent on the reroofing.
It is work like this that grant funding helps to support.
How do we keep costs down?
Well, while we have
and need paid staff,
we are essentially a volunteer organization.
We rely on volunteers for governance, asset management
and planning, financial oversight, course management,
oversight, project management, marketing and sponsorship,
and organizing competitions and running events.
But as you've already heard today, it's getting harder
to get volunteer commitment
with most volunteer work being done by a smallish group
of active volunteers.
This isn't in keeping with the research
that shows while people volunteer for short term gigs, such
as for a particular event, finding those who are prepared
to commit for the longer term is challenging.
Manor Parks situation is no different.
Getting people with the time, skills
and preparedness to commit to what it takes
to keep a club running
and thus keeping costs down is not as easy as it used to be.
So why not seek alternative funding? You might ask.
Well, gone are the days when our course used to be closed.
A lot of Fridays for corporate events.
Gone are the days when sponsorship was easy to get
and gone are the days when our clubhouse was a
hub for social events.
We simply cannot generate sufficient income outside
of subscription and green fees.
Yes, we could raise both of these,
but that would limit access to those
who could afford to pay.
And as I stated at the start of the submission, access
and equity matter to us.
So we need grant funding.
We are lucky to have a dedicated volunteer grants manager
who does a superb job in applying for grant funding.
It's no easy task
as the 13% success rate outlined in our Richard submission
shows, but the sun.
But the funding is essential for us to continue
to run our club and enable ongoing access
and participation in the club and in golf.
So refining the online casino gambling bill is what we were,
what we are asking for as stated at the beginning.
This means embedding the bill the same purpose
as the gambling Act.
2003, ensure that money from gambling
benefits the community.
This would mean that some revenue from online casino
gambling is shared with clubs and communities.
This is not a handout but a hand up.
It does not create dependency.
Rather, it will help some clubs to survive
and others to thrive.
As such, grants are an investment in people,
including young people
and those from lower socioeconomic backgrounds.
Grant funding from profit, from grant funding from gambling
pro grant funding from gambling profits helps
to level the playing field.
It ensures greater equity
and access to sporting clubs for all.
Thank you. Um, I think Celia Yes, please.
Um, I just wanted a clarification of one phrase
and then I did have a question.
Screen sports, what do you mean by screen sports?
It's not in ours.
Oh. Could have sworn I saw it there.
Manor Park Golf Club
That in our written submission. That's
All right. Yeah, I thought it
was. Yeah, no.
Have You got a, nevermind.
Anyway, I can, I can find that out.
Um, the other one was you talk about the uptake,
the decrease in class for gambling funding availability.
Do you have, and and you suggest that may related
to an uptake of online gambling.
Do is that anecdotal or No,
It came from the research that was presented
to you on Monday by, um, Martin Sneden.
Yes. I wasn't on the, sorry. I apologize.
I wasn't on the subject move then. So, great.
That's useful to know. Thank you very much. I'll look it up.
That's fine. Uh, la Lydia Sini. Thank you.
Thanks Chair. And thank you for your, uh,
presentation this morning.
Uh, it's really helpful to have a clearer understanding.
Um, I had a question just in terms of,
you talked about keeping costs down Yeah.
Because the limit of funding, but also the clubhouse
and there's requirements in terms
of the infrastructure clubhouse.
Yes. Yeah. Um, can you highlight,
because you talked about the roles mm-hmm.
That have been shared around,
but the limitations have,
has the club thought about any other limitations?
And you've highlighted very clearly
where the grant funding goes through
and why it's a necessity.
Yeah. Um, can you highlight anything else in terms
of reviewing your sort
of structure plan annually or anything like that?
Uh, we've got a 10 year asset management plan. Okay.
So we've planned out over 10 years
and we know that over 10 years we need about
a million dollars Right.
To, um, main just to maintain and renew what we've got.
I mean, it's like all golf clubs built in the sixties
and seventies, the old buildings, they, um,
in an ideal world, we bowl down and we don't need.
Yeah. So that's where we are.
But we, we know, we know where we are going
and we know what the spend is going to be
and we know the contribution that grant funding makes to it.
It's only probably around 4% of our funding pot,
but it really does make the difference.
Thank you for your submission.
We're actually out of time there, but we'd really appreciate
you both coming to join us
and we're gonna move to an congratulations online.
Thank you. Online submission now from the Brass Band
Association of New Zealand.
Um, thank you for joining us.
Uh, I presume it's John, there's 10 minutes for this.
You can take your written submission as read, um,
but you may like to leave some questions.
I'll let you know when there's a minute to run all yours.
Thank you very, thank you very much.
Um, thank you for the opportunity to meet with you today.
On behalf of New Zealand's Brass Band community, um,
I'm John Sullivan, the president
of the Brass Bands Association of New Zealand.
And with me online is Helen Lee,
our association's executive officer.
Um, I'm a fully aware you have many submissions to get
through and from what I've heard this morning, um,
our thoughts appear not to be unique.
So I'll be as concise as possible.
Um, to provide some context, the Brass Bands Association
represents a membership of
around 1900 players across 56 bands located from,
uh, Wonga Ray to Invercargill.
Uh, 30% of our members are actually under the age of 20.
So a key focus for the Brass Bands Association is the
development and support of youth players
through our education programs
and running our annual national secondary schools Brass band
and National Youth Brass Band.
I'll take our submission as read
and make some brief comments and remarks
and happy to answer questions.
Following in summary, our concerns are
that while we largely support the intent
of the draft legislation to regulate
and manage online gambling, we believe the failure
to require online casino gambling operators
to share a proportion of their gross revenue
with the community will have a significant negative impact
on brass bans throughout New Zealand as well
as the wider arts and sports sector.
A proportion of gross revenue generated
by Class four operators is currently required to be shared
with community organizations,
which contributes very necessary funding to our organization
as well as to our member bands.
The amount
of revenue available via Class four funding has been
declining since 2020 and running.
Our organization is getting harder financially
as inflation has pushed up costs, sponsorship,
sponsorships are fewer and smaller
and local government support is reducing.
If this bill were to pass in its current form,
the expected consequential loss, loss of class four funding
will add further financial pressure, severely reducing
what the Press Bands Association
and our member bands can do for participants.
And our local community music is essential
to improving mental wellbeing, youth engagement
and community connection.
So our recommendations are
therefore that the online casino gambling bill is amended
to include the same principle from the gambling app to 2003.
That is an ensure that money from
gambling benefits the community.
And this principle is achieved by requiring
that a proportion of gross revenue from online casino
gambling is shared with the community as currently happens
with Class four operators.
That's essentially what I have to say
and happy to answer any questions.
Thank you. And I'll, I'll hand over firstly
to Limon, Lydia Sini.
Oh, thank you for your, uh, written submission and oral,
but also outlining that you've got a 30% of your membership
that are under 20 years.
That's really heartening to hear.
Um, brass bands are very much welcome, particularly in our,
um, celebrations, uh, for return services.
I just wanted to ask, just in terms of
that youth component, 'cause you're nationwide.
Um, what are the sort of the immediate needs
for the younger population given
that you're quite widespread in terms of instruments
and players and members?
I can answer that on behalf of the association.
So for our younger players,
what the association does is run annual training courses.
So at the end of this month,
we'll have a national Secondary schools brass band,
at which 73 players from secondary schools will come
together in Wellington to perform in two bands.
Uh, and to learn from adult tutors, they then go
and do two concerts out in the community.
So to show, to practice their performance skills.
What they gain from that is obviously musical skills,
but also social skills
as in meeting people from around the country.
It's especially good for people
who are in very small towns like Westport.
They come and meet kids from all around the country
who have the same passion,
same interest in brass banding.
So it means when those children from small towns like
that move to the city for jobs
or for university, they've already got social contacts
through brass banding so they can go
and join a brass band with the friend
that they meet at secondary schools.
We also run annually a, um, national youth band, which is
for players under the age of 23.
This is a high performance band.
Um, kids are people are players are there by audition.
Again, it brings together the players from age 14
to 22 from around the country.
It gives them the next level up in performance.
So they train for over six days
and they do, again, community-based concerts for those kids
to actually get there.
They need to, they, we charge a, um, a fee.
So for the secondary schools band it's $500 plus the
children need to pay for their own travel.
For the youth band it's $575 plus they
pay for their own travel.
They also bring with them their own uniforms
and obviously their their uniforms
and they bring instruments with them.
Those instruments are usually
provided by their, their community band.
Um, as in the band has purchased those
and they either hire them to the band to the player
or give them to them for free to be part of
that community band.
Um, for the travel, obviously as we said,
people are from Inva Cargo to re so we,
our youth band meets in Auckland in January.
We will have players traveling up from
Invercargill for that.
That is expensive for them. Mm-hmm.
They are supported in that by their community bands.
And we know that some of our community bands have also made
submissions and they run funding events
to help those players cover those costs to attend.
Thank you. Really well, yeah, Alan, very exciting.
And John, thank you for a very, um, clear
and succinct submission.
We, we do appreciate it.
And, and all that the, uh,
association does across the country.
Um, we are going to move on to our next submission.
Thank you very much. Um,
and we have Donna joining us from the Wahe, um,
surf Lifesavers or Beach Lifeguard.
Welcome. We've got 10 minutes for you.
Um, you may like to leave some time for questions.
Um, I'll let you know when there's a minute
to run Floor's. Yours.
Thank you very much. Yes, good morning.
Yes, I'm the chair of Yhe Beach Lifeguard Services.
Uh, we're at the bottom of the del providing, uh, a range of
services, which I will detail a bit later on.
But we also have with us, uh,
the CEO Steve Fisher from Surf Life Saving New Zealand.
So he's also gonna talk about the 74 clubs
that offer lifesaving and search
and rescue services, um, across the country.
So I think it's a really important opportunity to just show
to you how we operate
and how financially dependent we are on funding
that comes from areas like this particular topic.
So, um, Steve, if you are available, uh, now, um,
if you'd like to just do the introduction
and then I'll give you some stats around what a cup goes
through from a financial point of view.
Thank you. Thank you Donna. Can everyone hear me? Okay?
Great. No Kia. Good morning.
Um, so Surf Safe New Zealand obviously welcomes the
opportunity to speak today
and acknowledges the bill's intent
to prioritize harm minimization and to protect consumers.
Uh, however, as per our submission, our written submission,
we do have significant concerns, um,
if the bill passes in its current form.
Um, so Surf Life Saving New Zealand spent around
for 115 years, uh,
and we derive significant, um,
revenue from Class four gaming just over $4 million, uh,
in the last 12 months.
Uh, and these funds, many people think
of safe lifesaving, they think of the sport.
Well actually we're, we're a, you know, we're a,
we're a critical, um, emergency response and rescue service.
And the monies from Class four gaming, um,
have contributed towards the delivery
of our drowning prevention services,
surf lifeguard training, uh, salaries for staff
who support volunteers
and rescue equipment purchases, as well as our sport
and events, uh, program, which, uh, the sport
and events really helps us retain our lifeguards
and ensure that they're operating in
peak physical conditions.
So, um, look, I'd like to, you know, more,
more either on top of Surf Lifesaving,
the organization itself.
Our 74 clubs also rely heavily on gaming trust
to keep the lights on, um, for their equipment,
offer support services such as mental health
and wellbeing services to their guards.
And in some instances to carry out vital maintenance, uh,
and repair work on our club network around the country.
Um, I think it's only right that I acknowledge
that we received a certificate boost in central government
funding from the 24 25 budget round,
and we remain very grateful for that.
But just notwithstanding, um, if the monies
that were received from class four gaming
were cannibalized then, you know,
we would very quickly be in the financial.
We, um,
and as say an organization that's been around for 115 years,
um, we would be facing consultancy
literally within a few years.
Um, more broadly, I guess we're one of the,
the bigger community causes.
Um, but there are many thousands of others
that aren't in the fortunate position that we are.
And while I think it's, it's unintended,
I think this could create a significant widespread short
and long-term community harm should the bill pass in its
current form, uh, the information I have is that there are
around 9,000 community-based organizations all very worthy.
Uh, and our main concern is that the bill, um,
could decimate that social infrastructure, uh,
in a relatively short period of time.
So, um, on that, I will pass back to you, Donna.
Thanks, Steve. Just to give you a bit
of a insight into the life of Wahed Beach lifeguards.
So we're actually quite a big club in the sense
that we offer three flagged patrols in the summer plus one
water roaming patrol.
And we have a hundred lifeguards on average
that are educated, trained
and available to actually keep people safe at the beach.
But we also have a side of the, the lifesaving,
which not everybody realizes that we educate
and beach education around 250 children under the age of 13.
Every year we have a team of 50 competitors in
that senior master sports,
which is all about membership retention
and just again, about wellbeing
and just enjoying what we have to offer as volunteers.
But on top of that, we at Wahe Beach are very fortunate.
We have another 150 individuals who may not wear the red
and yellow uniform, but they volunteers in the background
doing coaching, fundraising, keeping the club healthy,
running events, and supporting the community.
So the number of people that are involved in the delivery
of lifesaving is actually much larger than
most communities realize.
Now, the reason there's so many people involved is if you
take Yhe Beach, we've got two roads in,
and in the last four years alone,
we've experienced a shark attack, fatal.
We've had a tornado go through, we've had a cyclone,
and then we've had stormwater flooding
that annihilated the city.
Now in that four and a half years, life saving
and lifeguards and call out squads
and certain rescue teams have all been part of the recovery.
So we've done enormous amount of work for a tiny community,
but the reason we are educated is
'cause who else is coming to a small town like Wahe Beach.
And so the funding that, uh, we're discussing today
keeps us able to provide those services.
So I thought you might like to just understand
that we put an IRB an inflatable rescue boat in the water.
We've got three patrols, so we have five boats each one
of those boats cost $21,000 with an engine,
and we get about six
or seven years turnaround on a, on an IRB.
So we are always having to replace gear
if we wanna buy a new trauma kit with a dfi.
And we have six of them
because we've got vehicles as well as patrolling towers,
as well as the clubhouse.
There's just, that alone is just over 5,000.
Uh, we spend nearly 6,000 on oxygen
and first aid supplies every year.
So over the last few years, you know,
that bill just keeps getting bigger.
Yeah. But we've had increases in things like our rates, our,
um, insurance, our power has gone up 16%,
so we've also got a cost of living
that's affecting us as well.
So that's just a little bit of an insight into the life of,
um, a chair trying to run a lifeguard club
where funding drives the ability for us to give
extremely good professional services.
And at Yhe Beach, which, you know, all I can represent,
but a lot of cubs are similar,
what do we do if we don't have the fundings
to have the right equipment in the right condition?
And so, yes, it's quite a task as volunteers
as I work in the dairy industry and we have police
and, uh, St.
John's people on our board and that they're there working
and then coming back to do volunteer work
to make sure we can deliver the services
that are really being applied to us from the community.
So I thought you might have some questions
that you would like to ask of us.
So, um, yes, please feel free now to
Sure. Thank you. And
I'm gonna hand over to Celia Wade Brown.
Good morning. And, um,
I've enjoyed staying in your surf club on one
of the kayak surf sessions, so, um, I know,
know your area well.
Um, my question,
however, was about if we allocate money from online gambling
to community purposes, do you see
that it should be divided up in some, um, solid ratio
between sports arts and culture environment
and perhaps some other category
that doesn't come to mind at the moment?
Or would it all be, um, up for grabs by everybody?
Or do you have some thoughts in that area?
Me personally, um, I think emergency services is still,
uh, uh, saving lives, um, keeping people coming home.
And we bought 40, uh,
we bought 53 people home in the last three summers,
whose lives would've changed if we hadn't been on the beach.
So I do think though, that the arts
and everybody has the right to have something,
but I've got a feeling that if we can't save lives,
first work with the police, St.
John's, you know, all the Coast Guard as well.
I think that's number one priority, bring them home, um,
make people safe, and then they can actually enjoy, um, some
of the other, uh, groups
that may benefit from things like the arts
and music and sport.
Yeah. But Steve, um, you may have a different opinion.
Yeah, look, I would advocate for all of them.
I, I would see that the government, uh, or,
or, um, you know, parliament could provide some guidance
to the large gaming trust,
but typically they have, uh, constitutions and, uh,
and purposes and reasons that look at how they split
what they fund and, um, I guess serves in a lucky position
with regards to our funding compared to many other groups.
And I would think that
maintaining a balanced social infrastructure
is critical for the country.
Thank you. Thank you.
And thank you to both of you for, um, joining us.
I know that those 53 families you spoke
of will be very grateful, but,
but I speak for, I think for the whole committee
to say we appreciate all
that you guys do on our purchase all summer along.
So, um, thank you for joining us.
We're gonna move to philanthropy New Zealand
now joining us in the room.
Um, welcome.
And we've got, um, up
to 10 minutes set aside for your submission.
You can take your written one as read,
but um, you may like to leave some time for questions.
I'll let you know when there's a minute to run.
Okay, great. Thank you. Um,
sorry, I'll just pull out my notes.
That's okay. Um,
so thank you for the opportunity
to make an oral submission on the bill.
Um, my name is Eva Hartson Sanders,
and I'm the Director of Policy
and advocacy at Philanthropy New Zealand.
Um, which is a peak body for philanthropy
and grant making an,
we're a nonprofit independent membership organization
and we support generosity, effective giving
and a strong philanthropic ecosystem
and offer guidance for people within an interest in making
the world a better place.
We have over 200 members, um, throughout New Zealand, uh,
including, oh, sorry.
Um, community trust, community foundations,
family foundations, corporate, uh, philanthropy members,
donor advised funds, high net worth individuals, um,
professional advisory members, government agencies
and local councils, iwi, Maori entities
and community charitable organizations.
Phil, philanthropic organizations
and the Giving sector are an essential part
of our country's infrastructure,
and they're working with communities all over the country
to support areas of human social, economic
and environmental development.
The sector's grant and donation funding is worth
around 3.8 billion per annum,
and it's complimentary to government funding
and not positioned to fill core service gaps.
It supports innovative initiatives
and offers important risk capital for social change.
Um, we've been speaking to ministers up, Epstein and Willis
and others in government about
how the system can be improved, uh, to increase generosity
with the opportunity for significant growth,
particularly given the current intergenerational transfer
of wealth, um, which is valued at over $1 trillion
in growing corporate generosity.
There are also substantial sums
of capital funds available for investment.
So ensuring that there are the right incentives
and levers to increase philanthropy is more important at a
time when the government is reconfiguring their own
contribution to the community.
We are currently ranked at number 17 on the World Giving
Index, and we've dropped from number five.
So that's 12 places in just a couple of years. Mm-hmm.
Um, so turning to the bill, first,
we wanna recognize the importance
of introducing a licensing scheme, um,
for online casino gambling.
This was a major gap in the regulatory framework
and is both necessary
and well overdue given the public health risks of problem
and underage gambling
and particular risks that apply in the online environment
regulation that adopts a public health approach
through a license ga licensing scheme as welcome.
Our submission, um, as you would've read, largely relates
to the detail of that regime, uh,
with a particular focus on the impact it will have on
funders, the funding ecosystem and communities.
We also look at how the proposed scheme could be
strengthened to give better effect to the purposes
in section three of the gambling act,
including the overarching principle of harm minimization.
Like many other submitters, we are concerned
that the bill does not include a requirement
for license holders to disperse, uh, money to the community
or any replacement funding mechanism.
This is a major gap inconsistent with other licenses
for gambling in New Zealand, and will give an undue
competitive advantage to operators, um, many
of whom will be based offshore
and are not contributing
to New Zealand's economic growth or community benefit.
New Zealand funders are supporting an increasingly fragile
and complex range of community needs and causes,
and have advised us that there is more demand for support,
um, than they're able to meet.
For example, the impacts of COVID are far reaching,
particularly for those who are most vulnerable
in our written submission.
We highlight this with government statistics on increased
mental health and food security needs.
And the charity tax proposals have progressed,
will also reduce the available funding for communities.
There are a growing number of New Zealanders
who are engaging in online gambling, which is likely
to reduce revenue gathered from other sources over time.
And we're already seeing that in statistics.
These other gambling sources contribute
to both the economy and the community.
And our members are concerned about both the lost
opportunities that this funding stream will cause
and the flow on impact will have to the rest
of the funding system and the charitable sector, um,
which is already under pressure, which I've spoken about.
The concern is that as online gambling grows,
it will cannibalize revenue from land-based gambling
and erode the community funding base
without a replacement mechanism.
One of our members, foundation North, has
provided data, uh, that shows an example of the withdrawal
of funding at the regional level for Northland
and Auckland for the 2024 calendar year.
Class four gambling poker pokies funding
for the region totaled, um,
103,000,927 $283,
which is down from the previous year.
Lotteries, um, uh,
totaled 54,000,020 7,295.
And Sky City Community Trust dispersed 4 million
one hundred and fifty nine five hundred and twenty seven,
also down from the previous year
in the same calendar year Foundation North,
which is the community trust for Auckland
and Northland funded 74,000,594,
which is up from the previous year of 54 million.
Um, the reduction in funding from Class four gambling
and casinos has an impact on other funders like Foundation
North, which currently intentionally cofunds with Sky City
and separately funds organizations that rely on Class four.
Gambling money is one of their funding streams.
The bill makes those programs
and organizations more precarious.
The impact to the funding environment funders
and community is not isolated to Auckland and Northland.
Every community in the country will be ne
negatively impacted, including your electorates with a loss
of funding available for clubs, sport, environmental,
and other causes that your communities care about.
And N-Z-I-E-R report from August this year estimated
that the national funding to sport from Class four gaming
trust could be reduced by 43.3 million
after five years,
which is a 24.6% reduction in funding granted
to community sport in 2024.
This would lead to more pressure on other funders, um,
particularly those funding regionally
and supporting community infrastructure.
There's no clear or compelling reason or evidence
or justification provided neither the bill
or supporting documents, um,
from officials about why online casino gambling should be
exempt from providing funds to the community in the same way
as class four gambling licenses or in-person casinos.
We've not seen any evidence
or modeling from the department showing
that online casino gambling increases
because a certain amount is dispersed to the community.
Gambling licenses are a privilege, not a riot.
And one of the core elements of the ACT is that a portion
of the funds made in profit is shared with the community,
the harms of gambling to the individual, their family,
workplaces and community from gambling are well known.
And problem gambling is treated as a public health issue.
And as part of this well established policy,
our legislation adopts a harm ization approach,
which includes not just the gambling levy
or the accountability requirements in the licensing system,
um, but also a community contribution
to help rebalance the harm to the community.
This is a longstanding principle that has led to hundreds
of millions of dollars being granted annually
for those causes we've talked about.
We recommend that the bill be amended to
introduce a requirement
for online casino gambling license holders.
This could be achieved by making it a compulsory licensing
condition with a minimum amount
or formula set out in primary legislation.
It is unclear how the requirements
and causes 38 to 40, um,
which ensure gamblers are over 18 minimizing harm,
excluding problem gamblers will be monitored
and enforced in the online environment,
and how much resource will be put into this activity.
Mm-hmm. This includes, for example,
advertising targeting young people
or problem gamblers, sharing
of data about one minute remaining.
Okay. Vulnerable individuals for commercial gain
and digital features
that are designed to make gambling addictive.
The other areas the committee may wish to consider
as strengthening the community consultation requirements
and regulations or requirements are developed.
Lowering the maximum number of licenses,
which is three times the amount of in-person casinos, um,
and enforcement of penalties in the act will be easier if
there's a requirement for a representative of the company
to be domiciled on New Zealand. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
That does, um, actually, unfortunately brings us to the end
of the time, but thank you for a very thorough submission.
No, you're welcome. Um, and we,
we appreciate you joining us here today. If
There are any, would we be able
to get a copy of the notes?
'cause they seem to be additional. Oh yeah.
If you are, they are additional, yeah.
And if you have, if Pen has any other questions, I'm happy
to answer those over email as well.
Thank, thank you. We'll, um, thank you. Yeah. Yeah.
We'll be in touch and if you can send that through,
we'd, we'd be very grateful.
But we are gonna move back online for our next submission
for Tulsa Park Mountain Bike Club.
And, and we have Alan, I think with us, you,
we've got 10 minutes for your submission
and you're welcome to leave some time for questions.
I'll let you know when there's a minute to run
and you can take your written one as read.
We've got it in front of us. The floor's. Yours.
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen of the committee,
and thanks for this opportunity to speak.
Um, do Minow City Council established the first mountain
bike tracks, uh, Charles and Tora Park in 2010.
Um, it didn't take very long for effects of cattle weather,
general lack of weed trimming,
spraying other maintenance become to become quite evident.
The, um, our club was formed in, uh, incorporated in 2013
to formalize volunteer efforts at the time to take on
that maintenance, um, to,
to keep the tracks in some usable condition.
While the newly formed club, uh,
had its genesis and trail maintenance.
We now run events, um, races throughout the year
and are proud to offer some of the most fun,
most challenging and lowest priced, um,
mountain bike events in the Auckland region.
Um, one frequent criticism of the early, uh, 2010 tracks was
that they were not particularly targeted at
our more capable riders.
And in reality, large sections were more than an,
not much more than an uninspired gravel path
in a Cal Paddock vibe.
And to keep riders in other park users interested
and invested, and to grow the user numbers we needed
to expand and develop the network to that end.
New trails were added in 2018, 2019,
and again in July this year.
And we now have 14 kilometers
of diverse single track in the park.
Much of it tucked away in newly planted bush areas,
and more than one person's commented, it's now their,
their mental health space.
Um, I cannot stress enough the, the point that, uh,
building these trials simply would not have been possible
without the wholehearted support
and backing of worry, licensing, trust and trillion Trust
and funds from pokies.
We're now partnering with Auckland Council to ensure
that the assets properly maintained and we have memorandums
and operations agreements in place.
And with recent council funding, we have been able
to hire qualified and approved contractors to repair
and rejuvenate some tired and worn damage tracks.
However, the, the Council OPEX funding is only available
for maintenance of existing council assets
and not for growth or expansion.
We also run regular working bees from when the ground
softens in April, may through to October, November,
where volunteers, uh, fix all the little
and not so little things that the contractors,
council contractors and our contractors couldn't address.
Of course, the club needs to have funds on hand
to provide the proper tools
and the materials these volunteers
will use if they are to help.
We operate in a public park with the public free
to use the facilities at any time they wish.
And we've only just started charging a small membership fee
in the last year, just enough
to cover some admin and affiliation costs.
Some of our other regular costs include insurance, website,
tool, maintenance, repair, fuel, refreshments
for volunteers, signage, timber, and fixings.
And while the Manual River Local Board has contributed
significantly to help cover cover some of these costs,
we are still almost entirely dependent on Class four pokey
trust funds for capital work, new trails, new tools
and equipment and the like.
We're currently working with council on developing a draft
of a strategic plan to increase the trial network out
to approximately 30 ks 30 kilometers.
But if we were to continue to build
and maintain the, um,
mountain Bike Trail network in Tora Park into the community
asset that we believe South Oakland should have,
we will continue to need access to class four pokey funds
as there really aren't any viable alternatives.
We understand that the intent with this current bill is
to regulate the online gambling casino,
but we are concerned that the bill does not require the
online casino operators to give any of their profits back
to New Zealand communities
and for the impact on the future availability
of class war, the pokie trust funds.
We asked that the committee embed in this bill the same
principles as the Gambling Act 2003 and,
and the earlier, uh, 1977 Gamers
and Laies Act, namely,
that gambling should benefit the community
by requiring some revenue from online casino gambling is
return and shared with the community, especially sports.
Thank you.
Thank you. And, and,
and a very clear conclusion just
as it's nicely embolden in your written submission.
We appreciate that. Um, I'm just looking
to see if there are any questions from other members.
I just have one from Sir, we Brown.
If I may. Um, and congratulations on the work you do.
I'll have to come and have a personal look. Oh,
Please do.
Um, but I'm really interested in if we do end up with, um,
funding from this form of gambling come coming
to the community in some way.
Do you have any thoughts about, um, where the division
between, for example, lifesaving community organizations,
NetSafe Arts, um,
and culture, how it gets broken down and,
Um, well, I I, I, I have a personal preference for, um,
the sports and, and particularly mountain biking in which
I'm very enthusiastic about.
But I went to a public meeting just a couple nights ago
and I listened to some people very passionately speaking
about their out community outreach
and helping homeless in our community.
And, um, to think that they would be deprived of a
fair share, uh, would be, would be wrong.
Um, so I, I think that it should be,
uh, we have haven't got the ideal system.
It, it's, it's a challenge to get access to the funds,
but to, to put one group ahead
of another, I think would be wrong.
Um, life saving community support.
Um, we have a lot of, um, disadvantaged people in the area
and to, to not give back.
I mean, that's where a lot of these funds come from.
So I think to be able to put it back,
put the funds back into that area, um, and try
and do some good, continue to do good with,
with this money would be, and,
and not to prioritize too much and,
and not to turn it into a, a fund for some other,
um, roading or some other sort of activity.
I, that answered the question, but
No, that's very helpful. Thank
you. And thanks for joining us, um, today.
We are going to move to our next submission now,
but wish you and the club all the best.
Oh, thank you very much. And in the room, I'm,
I'm hoping we might have, is it Sarah from Museums?
Oh, welcome. Are you together?
Um, I'm just Come come and join us at the table.
Anyway, you're here. You should come and be part of it. This
Is Chrissy Rio Scott, uh, also with museums.
Oh, thank you. Well, look, there's, we've got up to,
um, 10 minutes for this.
Thanks, Gwen. Um, so, um,
feel free to use up some of that time.
You might like to leave some for questions.
I'll let you know when there's a minute to run
and you can take the written submission as read.
But otherwise it's all yours.
Well, Morina Coto, thank you so much for having us.
I'm Sarah McGuire.
Um, I'm the Chief Executive of Museums xo.
Uh, and this is Chrissy Real Scott, who's our membership
and marketing specialist.
Um, I will try to keep it, uh, keep time for questions.
However, my members have had a lot of interest in this bill
and have added considerably to my speaking notes.
Uh, so bear with me as I get through, uh, all
of the points they wish for me to make.
Uh, museums represents public museums
and galleries across the country.
Our sector comprises some 417 institutions throughout
New Zealand, and the people
who work within them are paid and unpaid.
Um, but it is not a reliance on the
current pokey grant scheme.
That brings me into the room today.
Um, I'm here to speak to the opportunity this bill presents
to better leverage cultural assets like museums
and galleries, uh, by backing our primary partners,
local councils.
Our ask is that this bill provide for a levy
that has a dedicated contribution for museums and galleries.
Um, we support a crown levy that is redistributed
to local museums and galleries through councils, which own,
run and part fund them.
Um, and without seeming too hung up on the mechanism.
The outcome my sector is interested in is a sustainable
museum and gallery sector with a burden
of delivering education and tourism outcomes.
Um, the preserve of central government is born more evenly
between rate payers and taxpayers.
Um, so viewed in isolation, uh, you might think this bill
has a moderate impact on museums
and galleries, and you would be right.
Um, in 2024, as you will have read, arts
and cultural organizations received some
20 million in pokey grants.
Um, and this amount could be easily diminished, uh,
if gambling spending is spread more thinly across
online gambling platforms.
Um, but what we do understand, uh,
deeply is the dependence museums
and galleries have on local council funding.
I have here, and hopefully with you some research
that museums commissioned through Bill.
Thank you, uh, on the proportions of, uh,
external revenue sources on which museums
and galleries rely.
Uh, and the data shows that any change to current lotteries
or gambling funding, uh, in light blue will impact small
and medium museums and galleries the most.
Um, but it pales in comparison
to our reliance on local council partners.
Now, the research is slightly out of date. It's 2223.
Uh, but I think it still provides a really useful glance at
how the sector is currently funded.
Yes. And what it also demonstrates is
that we are absolute hustlers when it comes
to securing alternative, uh, revenue streams, um,
and internal, uh, sources of revenue
that you'll see their cs, um, you know, admission fees,
function rooms, and other spaces and things like e-commerce.
Um, so we are industrious in the way
that we deliver for communities.
Uh, and we ask as a part of this bill that the government be
as well for my members, a decision not
to require a community contribution from offshore businesses
while central and local government have their hands in the
pockets of rate payers
and taxpayers is poor for, we believe
that it is the government's prerogative
to raise revenue and we support that.
But it must, in turn, acknowledge what it is asking
of public institutions.
For us, museums and galleries are in a real bind right now.
We care for some 45 million artifacts valued at some
$3.6 billion.
Now, those figures come from research we commissioned, uh,
with Burl a few years back.
And it has our total asset value at something more like
$5.6 billion when you take into account
collections and buildings.
So any business of, with an asset base of
that size would be able to return significant profits.
Um, but it's not the case for the, the gallery
and the museum sector,
which delivers many critical public services, um, you know,
which can be considered profit in non-financial terms.
So we are appointed, as you know, by the public via central
and local government to be custodians of the nation's tga,
um, and irreplaceable heritage.
Despite delivering immersive interactive education
and science programs,
my members receive very little funding from Vote
education, vote tourism.
Um, and despite being an integral part
of the national education infrastructure,
we are still being propped up
inadequately by local government.
We deliver significant ROI for tourism,
but my members are relying on an increasingly squeezed rate
payer base, um,
rather than taxpayer funding through vote tourism.
Now, I appreciate that's not the business of this committee,
but it felt important
to set the broader context in which we survive
and hopefully thrive.
Um, we know that tourism
and education are government priorities,
so I'll just use one example.
Um, the Catherine Mansfield Birthplace Society have
also submitted to you.
They're a member of mine
and they've taken a slightly different position, um,
or a position that focuses obviously on their bread
and butter, whereas I'm here as their peak advocate speaking
to the kind of systemic, um, situation here.
They're a registered charity.
They own and operate a house in garden here in thon.
It tells the story of what it looked like
to be a Pakeha family in Wellington in the 19th century.
Um, it's a window into the origins of, uh, the inspiration
of one of New Zealand's most
internationally acclaimed writers.
Um, the Catherine Mansfield House delivers exhibitions,
educational programs and workshops for community
and gaming trusts are some of the few remaining funders, uh,
whose remit is wide enough to be of any use to them.
Uh, and that's an increasing, um, concern for my members.
So if this funding dries up
or is diminished, their ability
to maintain this built heritage, um,
and the program say also simply won't be viable.
And some, and some might think so what, um, some
of these places need to close.
Um, but to do that without exploring
and promoting every in, you know, innovative funding source,
um, would be a massive insult to the public funding
that's already been contributed
and to the community of support, um,
that is invested in these places.
I can assure you that across the country, museums
and galleries have more support than their balance sheets
show at a time when the cost
of living is skyrocketing.
It is so important that people have places they can visit
that enrich them, places that educate
and inspire and excite them.
Museums and galleries are places, um, to gather, to meet,
to take visitors from out of town
and overseas to spend money at the calf
to buy gifts at the shop.
Um, as well as the more serious, uh, deliverables
for education and our earnest mandate, um,
to educate the next generation of New Zealanders.
Um, we believe that responsible asset management,
these decisions, uh, need to be staged
and deliberate rather than closures being the result
of neglect and an inability to get our own houses in order.
So we support central government raising revenue,
and we ask simply
that revenue supports the sustainable operation of museums
and galleries, which are delivering cost effectively, uh,
on government objectives. Thank you.
Thank you, um, very much. Celia, did you? I did, yes.
Celia went around if I may. Thanks. Thank you. Thank you.
And thank you for the work you and your members do.
Um, I had a couple of questions about if
all of the gambling money came through, let's say class four
and um, TAB and so on mm-hmm.
And we prohibited online casino
gambling for the sake of argument.
Mm-hmm. Do you think that that would protect the money that
your institutions get from Class four?
To some extent? And I do have another question.
Uh, I'd like to put that question to my members.
I think, I think that what we are seeing is
that while sums are still able to access Class four, the,
for them, it's still a dwindling fund. And yeah.
And, and I guess that's a question. Is it dwindling?
'cause people are wising up
to gambling list with the cost of living?
Or is it dwindling cost?
The money's going to online gambling? I guess we don't,
I I, I mean in terms of my members, I think
that actually some of these funds are,
they still do have prereqs
that my members do not qualify for.
So there are portions of these, um, funds
that they can access.
But for example, down the road in Thornton here, you know,
fixing a heritage fence, right?
When you're going up against organizations
that are supporting, you know, kids in poverty life
that are supporting, you know, lifesaving services,
that's not, that's actually, those aren't applications
that my members feel comfortable making,
but heritage fence are actually really expensive.
And if we want build heritage,
you know, we have to pay for it.
Just the other one because, um, while if mentioned it,
um, the Ivy L Yes.
Um, the idea that
that should be a little bit more tightly controlled in its
distribution and definitely contribute to museums
and galleries, that's something that, um,
I'd be interested if you've got any more background in your
members thinking on that.
Yeah, absolutely. This is something
that we are really big on,
and I think it speaks
to the broader funding environment in which we operate.
This single piece of legislation might, you know,
I might seem like an outlier in terms
of my submission today,
but it is single pieces of legislation like this
that taken on the whole, you know, really do stand
to undermine, um, the funding that we require, um,
and need to survive.
So we look to, uh, different ways of
how we might fund what we do.
Um, and we look at the tourism contribution we make,
which is huge, um,
to Papa you will have seen recently was just voted
as TripAdvisor's number one destination
and congratulations to Papa.
Mm-hmm. And, um, we, we know
that international tourists come and visit these places.
Um, as a first quarter of call, we are front of house
for the international tourists that come
to New Zealand and domestic tourists.
So certainly we see, um,
that our sector deserves a share of that levy.
We are, uh, critical tourism infrastructure,
and yet we do not receive a portion of vote tourism.
Um, so we, yeah,
we would urge the government to look at that.
Um, and it's, it feels like this,
that give us the opportunity to speak to some
of those broader concerns.
So thank you for the opportunity.
Thank you. And we have just snuck a little bit over time,
but it was worth it to hear about that.
And congratulations to Tepa as well.
Um, thank you for both joining us today.
Um, and with that, we are going to move on
to Hawkes Bay Equestrian Park.
So this is just a slight change in order while we wait
for the court theater to join us.
Um, Yvonne, thank you for joining us.
We, we've set aside up to 10 minutes for your submission.
Uh, you can take your recent one as read.
We've got it in front of us.
Uh, and you may like to leave some time for questions,
but, um, the floor's, yours.
Okay. Thank you very much.
Um, good morning
and thank you for the chance to speak today.
I've been watching the submissions over the last couple
of days and I realized
that our written submission was very
brief inadequate, really.
So this gives me an opportunity to expand.
My name's Yvonne Steers
and I'm here representing Hawke's Bay Equestrian Park
Incorporated as their vice president.
When I filled in the submission form,
I ticked yes to speaking.
I honestly didn't expect to be called,
but I'm glad that I have been and given this opportunity
'cause it's an issue that really matters to us
and many others like us.
As you have heard, Hawkes Bay Equestrian Park is
located in the heart of Hastings Hawkes Bay.
It's a not for-profit incorporated society.
And our purpose is simple.
We provide a safe, affordable,
and welcoming space for equestrians of all ages
and disciplines on a hundred acres
of beautiful park-like grounds.
We are a dedicated venue to seven affiliated groups,
including eventing show, jumping, dressage, pony Club,
Western riding mounted games, and Puck ahu Sports Club.
All of these groups call the park their home,
and each of those affiliates has two members
on the board of the park.
So it's a really collaborative society.
We all work together. We meet every month, um,
to discuss the future of the park
and what we need and what we want.
And it's the board's role to make sure the facilities are up
to scratch for them and their riding members.
It's largely run by volunteers, with the exception
of our 82-year-old caretaker.
Can you hear me? Sorry.
Yes, we can. Thank you.
We were, we were just checking the timing
because our chairs had to pop out from one moment.
We don't want to short change you.
Oh no, I think it'll be quick.
Um, where was I? Oh, yes. Page to you.
Year old Keter, who drives our nearly 82-year-old tractor,
our income comes from ground fee charged to riders who come
to enjoy our space.
And from events that the affiliates run
and from horse grazing, the park is open
to casual riders pretty much all the time
through an online booking system.
We charge $12 per day per rider,
so it's very, very economical for people to come.
Um, in line with horse and health, sorry, horse health
and welfare guidelines, we have a big plan for the future.
We would like to install covered yards
to protect the horses from the Hawke's Bay Sun.
And this will attract dressage riders
and show jumpers to the park.
And the long-term plan is to add a large all weather arena,
which we need in order to run year round events.
We will require about half a million dollars for this.
So it's gonna be long term and expensive,
but we will be going to the Class four
funders for some of it.
We do have some philanthropic people within our area.
We can also go to since 2021,
our park has received just under 59,000
in community funding.
And that support from the Class four has been
very important to us.
A few examples of what it was used for.
After Cyclone Gabrielle, we needed drainage.
We realized we needed drainage, so we had, um,
a project which was funded by the Class fours.
And that will also future proof our, uh,
property against further flooding.
We've been able to buy a mini tractor mower,
which the girls can drive
and insulate the car, the, the hall
and carpet, our hall install irrigation equipment,
and even build some cross country fences
for the casual riders to enjoy.
We are currently applying for a new tractor
as our old one is about 40 years old
and uses more oil than diesel.
None of this would've been possible without
the community funding.
And every one of our seven affiliates also applies
for Class four funding.
They use it for their own events, for their rosettes,
for their medics.
We all require under the new health
and safety rules from Equestrian Sports New Zealand
to have medics.
Each time we run an event,
it's about $3,000 for the medics.
We have to have veterinary cover.
That's another $1,500 for two days.
So everyone has their own projects,
and these events largely are for grassroots riders,
but we do also cater for riders on their journey
through to the Olympics.
We've had Mark Todd, we've had blood tape,
we've had all the big names as our event.
And that brings me to why we are here.
We absolutely agree that online gambling needs
to be regulated, but under this bill,
the proposed 15 license online providers
will have no obligation to return profits to the community.
And that is gonna leave a huge gap, not just for us,
but for all those wonderful people who have made
submissions over the last couple of days.
The Gambling Act 2003,
recognized the harm caused by gambling.
And one of the ways it tried to balance that harm was
by requiring pokey machine operators to return 40%
of their profits back to the community.
So our message is simple.
If online gambling is gonna be regulated,
which I think it should be
'cause the cat is out of the bag, we recommend, we recommend
that the community funding element mirror that
of the Class four system.
It already exists, and it works
because if that doesn't happen, organizations like ours
and others around the country
that we've heard from over the last few days are going
to find fundraising very challenging.
And that means fewer opportunities for young people,
for sport, for culture,
and for the other grassroots projects
that make our community strong.
Thank you for listening,
And thank you for taking the time to join us.
Um, really grateful. I'm just checking.
Um, we appreciate your time.
Uh, we are gonna move on to our next submission now,
which is from the court theater,
but wish you in the, in the park all the best.
Thank you. And online, we should also have, um,
they'll just be bringing their camera and microphone on,
but we should have Richard from the Court Theater.
Welcome, uh, Richard, thank you for joining us.
We've got up to 10 minutes for this.
Um, you can leave some time for questions
and we'll let you know when there's a minute to run.
The floor Is all yours,
Koto, uh, call Richard Endo.
I am the, uh, still rather new chief executive at the Court
Theater in ot, Tahi Christchurch.
Uh, I just wanted to, uh, thank you for the opportunity of,
uh, speaking to the submission that we made to you
and, uh, apologize a little bit from the b uh,
about the background I'm currently in at the Nu Corridor,
uh, creative New Zealand conference,
and I found a space, so if I get interrupted from
that space, I do apologize to you if and when that happens.
Um, but obviously very happy to be talking to you today.
I, um, wanted to give you a brief background.
Um, I know that you've read the submissions
that you've received, so I i I
won't go over all of the detail.
I'll read one section, but wanted
to give you some background about the court theater
and some of the recommendation part of our submission
as well, and answer any questions that you have as well.
Of course. So, um, the court theater is, uh, was founded,
established in 1971.
It's New Zealand's, uh,
largest professional theater company.
And, uh, we were very fortunate, nothing to do with me,
I hasten to add as I've just arrived,
but to move into our first ever purpose built theater this
year, uh, in, uh, the performing arts, uh,
precinct in the central, uh, center of, um, Christchurch.
Uh, so huge community effort there to, um, to bring that,
uh, new building, that new fer to life.
Um, and it is, yeah, right in the heart of the,
of the center of Christchurch.
So, uh, in 2024, to give you an idea of the scale of, um,
uh, what we provide, there were 82,487 audience members
that came to productions.
Uh, we do lots of education and outreach
and engagement programs.
Uh, we have, um, yeah, programs running all the time.
It's a really inspiring, uh, space to come into, uh,
and as a charitable trust, of course, that we, um, do
what all charitable trusts do, uh,
seek funding from a range of sources.
Of course, we've got ticket sales,
we also have core funding from Creative New Zealand.
Uh, and, uh, we reach out
to the community in different ways in including to, uh,
GA class four gaming trusts, um, to, um, hopefully, uh,
unfortunately receive money through those as well.
So in the last year, we received $200,000 of, uh,
income from, uh, gaming trusts, about 6.8%
of our total income from sponsorships,
grants, and donations.
Uh, this funding is essential for us, particularly in terms
of our community, uh, and outreach and engagement programs.
So supporting things like, uh, our school,
primary school tour that reaches 8,000, uh,
young people across white Taha the region.
Uh, each year, uh,
we can offer reduced ticket prices to school groups.
Uh, we can give young people opportunities
through youth musicals
and other productions to see, um, their selves on sta stage
and deliver, uh, and help them in terms of, uh, skills
and training and pathways into the performing arts.
Uh, we bring a lot of people into the center
of Christchurch now.
Uh, and that brings economic benefit as well to the city.
Uh, the building that we are, are now in is owned
by the community of Christchurch, uh,
and we're proud to be, uh, part
of the community in the center of the city.
Um, so that's a little bit about, uh, the court theater.
Um, I will read you now, um, if it's helpful,
a small section of our submission to you, which is, uh,
around the recommendations.
Um, so, uh, in 2024 plus four gaming trust distributed,
uh, $366.32 million in community funding across New Zealand
with 20.8 3000005.6 I, I'm gonna add one word
to the submission, which is only, uh, 5.68% of that, um, of
that, uh, distributed funding going, uh, to the arts.
Um, but it does benefit 885
or did last year organizations nationwide.
Um, this funding, um, as I'm sure you are hearing,
is critical in helping sustain a wide range of activity
from major national organizations
to small regional arts organizations, uh,
and much more, uh,
widely in the community delivering performances,
education programs,
and community events for hundreds of thousands
of New Zealanders each year.
Uh, the proposed online, uh, casino gambling bill proposes,
um, a significant risk, we believe
to this fund funding ecosystem without a requirement
for online gambling licensees to, uh, return a portion
of their revenue to the community.
Um, as GA class four gaming trust must under the Gambling
Act 2003, the pool
of event available funding for the Arts Sport.
Another purpose for purpose sectors will inevitably shrink
with no viable options
to replace the level of funding available.
As I'm sure you're hearing as well, the,
the environment out there in terms of arts funding
and more, uh, funding more generally is
really challenging at the moment.
So this is a really critical part of the funding mix to,
to help us and others be sustainable.
Uh, the likely outcome is
that revenue currently reinvested in local communities will
instead be retained by online gaming companies
that receive licenses.
We believe this is not only a threat
to existing funding streams
that many organizations includes our, ours rely on,
but is also a missed opportunity.
Online gambling is a rapidly spending sector in New Zealand
with an annual spend exceeding 1.6, uh, 1.8 billion
in 2023.
Uh, with the right regulatory framework,
this growth could be harnessed
to increase investment in the activities, organizations,
and facilities that enhance the lives of New Zealanders.
Instead, the bill as drafted, um, risks reducing the ability
of the arts sector and the wider full purpose community
to deliver social, cultural
and economic benefits that have been sustained
through community gaming funding for decades.
Um, our main recommendation then,
and apologies for the background noise,
which I believe is somebody dragging something from one room
to another, um, we recommend
that the online casino gambling bill be amended
to require licensees to return a substantial share
of their revenue to the community
as contestable funding mirroring the obligations currently
placed on Class four gaming Trust under the Gambling Act,
uh, 2003.
We believe this is, um, uh, essential for the sustainability
of ourselves and other people, uh, sector wide,
whether they're in the arts sport or others.
And, um, we, uh, yeah, wanted to obviously make
that submission and speak to it
and answer your questions relating to it.
So, um, uh, thank you so much to, uh, that short section
and, uh, that's fantastic to
Hear from you. We've actually got a couple of minutes
left if you're happy
for a, um, question.
I'll start absolutely li Lydia Sini.
Thanks chair. Thanks Richard, for your,
um, clear submission.
I wanted to ask around your points that you made
around 8,000 students
that benefit from your programs across the Christchurch
City, which is really helpful.
Um, I just wanted to quickly ask, as emerging artists,
'cause obviously you are, um, allowing young people
to be involved and to learn, um, can you, do you have any,
um, artists or young people that go on
to actually do performing arts careers?
Is there, do you know? Oh,
Yeah, absolutely.
I'm, I'm learning a lot at the moment as I'm new
to the organization, but I know that, um, you know,
it's 54 years of history now where people have come,
they've learned, we do classes from, uh, you know,
young primary school up to adults.
We still, uh, doing adult education as well.
And there are definite pathways, you know,
people you would know and heard about, um, comedians as well
through our justices, the court justices who've gone on to,
um, you know, important careers in the arts in Alt Aurora.
And, um, that's a testament to the, some of the support
that we can receive through class four.
Um, gaming trust really enables that kind of, uh, work
that mahi to to happen.
So, uh, we believe it's, um, yeah, it's essential to be able
to continue that work, which we believe is important
for the, for the whole of the community.
Thank you. And silly way, brown. One last question.
Thank you, Richard. Nice to see you and your new hat.
Thank you. Thank you. And congratulations.
Um, I was really interested in if, um, we
reduce the opportunity for online gambling, so would that
maintain the income that you receive potentially you
and other organizations, obviously from class four gambling,
so stop the leakage to online.
Yes, it's a, uh, I mean, there's a bit of an unknown,
and it's not my area of core expertise,
but I mean, there is a concern in, in the sector that, um,
if there are different pathways for people to, um,
to do whatever they'd like to do in society, then,
then there will be impacts on, on the funding available to,
you know, contestable funding available.
So it is a concern, um, uh, to answer your question
around whether, uh, restricting online gambling, um,
yeah, I, I guess there's a bit of an unknown there.
Uh, what we, however it's achieved this mechanism
of supporting the community is a really critical one.
So I just really, um, uh, on behalf of the community
of the court theater, um, wants to stress that, um,
you know, that that funding mechanism, um, it,
yeah, is critical.
And would the dis would distribution via local government,
um, be su supported by, for example,
the court theater presumably already have a relationship
with Christchurch City Council?
We do, yeah, of course.
We're, we're a a, uh, they're a, a main major partner.
You know, the building that we, uh, work out of is owned
by the community of Christchurch
through Christchurch city Council.
So, um, yes, I mean the, the, uh, conversation,
um, regarding the distribution of money from, uh,
plus four gaming trust, for example,
is a different conversation to the one we're having today.
But it's still a conversation that people
have in the community about, um, you know, the,
the benefits, how that works, how, you know,
there are challenges in that as well, frankly.
But, um, but, um, you know, we, we partner closely with,
with, um, local government.
So, um, ensuring that there is, um,
I guess enough resource to support the community as our,
is our primary, uh, concern and,
and not that, um, you know, there's no responsibility
through, through this new, uh, legislation to, um,
to reduce the amount that comes to the sector in general.
Thank you, um, very much. We appreciate your time.
We have just hit our, our 10 minutes there,
but wish you all the best for the
creative NZ conference as well.
So, uh,
and with that, we are going to move on to brain injury Kura,
um, brain injury in New Zealand, who I think are online.
We'll just give them a minute to bring. Welcome.
Um, thanks for joining us
and thanks for coming in a little earlier.
We, we appreciate it. There's, uh,
10 minutes set aside for your submission.
You can leave some time for questions
if you're able, that would be great.
I'll let you know when there's a minute to run
and we've got your written submission in front of us
as well, which you can take as read over to you.
Uh, RA thanks very much for that.
Um, I also have the, um, vice president
of brain injury in New Zealand, Dr. Kelly Jones to, um,
co-present with me.
Um,
We can see her screen as well.
We just don't have the camera,
but, um, hopefully Kelly can hear us.
I was gonna, I was gonna start off, um, anyway,
so perhaps I'll just jump into my bit
and then hand over to her.
That might make things a little bit easier.
Um, yeah, so I'm, I'm clear shuffle both.
I'm the National Administration Officer
for brain injury in New Zealand.
Um, and we are a national umbrella organization.
So we have 14 regional brain injury
associations across the country.
Um, um,
and collectively we provide person directed support
to people with brain injuries
and their families so
that they can access the right supports for them, um,
and to participate fully in their communities.
Um, we provide information, advice, um,
on all aspects of brain injury, community services
agencies and support networks.
Um, and we coordinate with other organizations
to provide wraparound support, uh, as well
as one-on-one support.
Um, we deliver workshops
who we training seminars out in the community, um,
including, um, and also with, uh, a other agencies
and, um, such as correction services and police
and local MSD offices.
Um, so we do, we do a lot in the community.
Um, and our work is focused on peer
and support groups, community capacity building, um,
and whanau support
because we recognize
that brain injury infects the entire
whanau, not just the individual.
Um, as far as numbers goes, the people, um, the total number
of people with brain injury that have engaged with, um,
national regional services from our associations
in 2024 was 115,000 people just over that.
And that is up from 86,000
seven hundred and twenty twenty three.
So there's quite a big jump there.
Um, and along with that increased demand for services, um,
our member associations note increased need for assistance,
navigating financial supports, for example, um,
and a broader range of individuals seeking support, um,
including those affected
by complex conditions in association with brain injury, um,
such as addiction and mental health.
Um, so that's just a little bit about what about us
and what we do and the need
that we are responding to in our communities.
Um, and now I was gonna hand over to Kelly, um,
to summarize our key concerns and recommendations.
Thanks. Claire Koto Jones.
Um, I'm Dr. Kelly Jones.
I'm here with my, uh, vice President
of Brain Injury New Zealand hat on.
I'm also an associate professor at a UT University within
the School of Community
and Public Health, where I lead the acquire brain
injury research program.
Um, some key concerns
that we outlined in our written statement,
appreciate the opportunity to talk with you all.
Um, key concern for us, uh,
are the vulnerability of the communities that, that we work
with and for, so there's increasing evidence of links
between history of brain injury
and increased risk for problem gambling.
That's not to say all people with a brain injury are going
to go on to become problem gamblers,
but there is a link there of increased risk
and that's likely, uh, multifaceted in terms
of, uh, additional complications
around mental health challenges, substance misuse, uh,
hazardous drinking, um, et cetera.
Um, and given we, when we look at only one type
of brain injury, traumatic brain injury, um,
latest estimates suggest 40,000 New Zealanders will sustain
a traumatic brain injury in a one year period.
In terms of prevalence,
we've got over 500,000 New Zealanders living with a history
of traumatic brain injury,
and that's only one type of brain injury.
So we have great concerns for, um, our communities.
Uh, we feel that the bill
lacks harm minimization strategies
and we have some recommendations around that
I'll come to shortly.
And then following on from other submissions, uh,
there are concerns as well around potential reduced funding
in terms of class four activity funding.
Um, while not an ideal source of funding, that is a reality
for many community sector organizations,
including ourselves.
Um, and this funding already has become increasingly
competitive, uh,
with increased demands across the not-for-profit sector.
Uh, this has really dire consequences
for our day-to-day operations.
I wanted to share with you some examples.
You know, recently across our associations we have had
to let staff go due to lack of funding.
We've had to reduce staff hours, reduce hours
of operations, uh, reduce the number of education, uh,
programs that we can run
and reduce the level of support we can provide
to communities.
Um, and particularly in rural areas
where we already know there are, uh, widespread inequities
and access to services,
we've had increased reliance on the volunteer workforce.
Um, so already the not pro not-for-profit sector is under
extreme stress around, um, lack
of finances and options for funding.
And we note that, that the current bill, uh,
does not require online casino operators to return
a proportion of funds to, uh, community groups.
In terms briefly of recommendations, uh, first
and foremost brain injury, New Zealand opposes the bill
recognizing, uh, that it may go ahead.
We also offer some recommendations
to better protect vulnerable communities and reduce harm.
These include complete ban on all forms of GA gambling
advertising, uh, raising the minimum age
for online gambling from 18 to at least 20 years, uh,
having set hours of operations.
So online gambling is not available
through these providers 24 7
and applying the same community return principle to online
casinos that exist for venues.
Kia
Ura. Thank you. Um,
for that, I'm gonna, um, hand first
to Celia Wave Brown.
Thank you for the work you do.
Um, could you send us any links to your
research particularly about people
with brain injuries being more vulnerable?
That would be helpful. Yeah. Yeah.
Um, and secondly, um, without this bill,
um, the people are legally able to
gamble offshore.
Um, so you are, while you oppose this bill,
you're not saying there shouldn't be any legislation,
you're just saying not this, is that correct?
Uh, so we are concerned that while yes,
there is obviously there are options available at the moment
for online gambling from offshore sites.
Um, the concern is, is is that if this is a,
a online licensing, you know, government approved, um,
providers in New Zealand provides a sense that this is going
to be, um, quite a safe,
um, environment.
Uh, I think it provides quite a different impression in
terms of level of risk and potential harm.
And so we feel there's a responsibility there to make sure
that there are at least the similar
safety harm minimization strategies in place
that there are, uh, currently for class four venue
operators, for example.
So thank you. Yeah.
While these international options are available,
it's quite a different thing, uh, when you've got your,
your local government, um, supporting,
um, these provisions.
Thank you, um, very much.
And thank you for your submissions today.
We appreciate, um, not just that,
but all the work that, that your team does.
So please pass on our thanks to them.
Uh, and with that we are going to move, um,
to another online submission.
Hopefully we have KU Sports Hub. Yes.
And Mark, um, thank you for joining us.
If you're able to get your camera going, that's fantastic.
Um, otherwise it looks like you can hear us.
I can hear you. Hopefully you can see me now.
Uh, not yet,
but we'll, we'll, um, we'll, we'll start anyway
'cause we wanna give you the maximum amount of time.
Oh, we did have you.
Um, and we, uh, appreciate you joining us.
Uh, there's up to 10 minutes, uh, you might like
to leave some time for questions.
I'll let you know when there's a minute to run.
Um, the time is all yours.
Yeah, sure. Hey, look, thank you
for this, uh, this opportunity.
I'd just first like to acknowledge all of you, uh, for
so sincerely I've, I've sat on for the last hour
and a half, um, you know, listening to people's submissions
and, and, uh, with, with empathy.
And, uh, it's interesting just to see
how many different organizations, uh,
do such wonderful things around the country
and benefit, uh, from, you know, what's in place now.
And, uh, and I guess a lot of, uh, the elements that, uh,
that I'd like to cover today, um, have been covered before.
Um, but just acknowledging, uh, yourselves
and all of those other people for the great work.
Uh, we are certainly not alone, uh, in the, in the things
that we try and do for our
community here up in the far north.
Thank you. So, just recognizing, uh, thank you
that you have received our submission.
Um, we've been very, uh, fortunate to be the recipient
of significant funding from, uh, from class four, uh,
gaming, uh, in particular with Tick Sports Hub in the order
of a million dollars, uh, in the last 12 months or so.
Now, that's a pretty big number, uh,
and it's a pretty ambitious project
and facility that we've developed.
It's been a pipe dream of our community
for literally generations.
Uh, and just to, to over cap it,
it's a heated indoor pool complex, uh, with sports fields,
eight, hard court netball
and other courts running tracks, et cetera.
So it's a very significant facility for the people of,
of communi, of Qia, uh, and the Turkey ward.
Uh, to put that in perspective also, uh, the people
that have enjoyed it, um,
we've had well over a hundred thousand users
of the facility in its first 12 months of operation.
Now that contrast to a local population of five
to 6,000 people.
So it's getting immense use.
Uh, and that's only because a, we completed it
and we could only complete it
because of, uh, some funding that we received through, uh,
through the gaming, uh, channels.
Uh, we unfortunately built through
that terrible COVID period and the disruptions, uh,
and inflation that that saw.
And without that, we wouldn't have got the facility opened.
Um, secondly, our challenge,
and again, I'm sure many others are in the same space,
energy is a massive cost to us,
especially in the far north being at the very end
of the generation line.
Uh, so our, our anticipated energy when we opened went from
$180,000 a year to well north of $300,000.
That's a very, very significant increase on a modest,
you know, income of fees and charges.
When you contrast that to the community we have here,
and the, the challenges
and the opportunities that we have up here,
our most expensive fee for the use of
that facility is $16 90 a week.
And we need to keep it at that sort of level to ensure
that all of the community
and not just parts of the community can enjoy that.
So we do have 1300 plus permanent members,
and as I say, out of a population in Qi of five
to 6,000 people, that's not insignificant.
The benefits of those people are,
are just off, off the chart already.
Um, not just from a health and leisure perspective, uh,
but also, uh, from a community cohesion perspective.
You know, I sat in the office there when we first opened,
and I looked out and I saw people from every walk
of life you can imagine, from
gangsters bringing their kids in for a swim, mixing with,
you know, folks, young
and old, across the board, um, people meeting, interacting,
talking in the pool meeting,
and mingling in the hydrotherapy pool.
So you can't put a value on the amenity
that the facility has brought
to our community in the community, uh, broader
of the TE Ward.
And so I go back to, um, probably the key point.
Um, I know many of the submitters making a reference
to this, and it's exactly the same reference that I,
I would make or we would make, is there really needs
to be a mechanism to share some percentage
of the takings from this community back into this community.
Uh, I, I'm not stupid enough to, to recognize that,
that online gaming's not happening.
It's not as managed
as it could be, and this needs to happen.
But if we lose the opportunity to get some
of those funds back into our community to so where some of
that money's going out from, um,
it does compromise our ability to continue
to operate our facility affordably
and sustainably into the future.
You know, we, we're a proud and strong community.
We've, we built a facility that's worth well north
of $20 million
and we built it for $12 million with local people.
Um, so, you know, we can, we can get the most out of
what we've got, but at the end of the day,
a $300,000 power bill is still a $300,000 power bill,
irrespective of solar
and other options that we are working through at the moment.
It's still going to be significant.
So we don't want to compromise our ability
to continue the great relationships we have
with the gaming machines
that we have up here if they have less money to disperse.
I appreciate that space is getting
more and more challenging.
There's more and more people looking at it, applying to it.
Their cases from the ones I've seen in the last couple
of hours are fantastic.
They're all superb, but there's a massive demand,
and I'd hate to see that pull continue to shrivel
or to shrink to a point that we can't offer this facility
to our community to enjoy and use and benefit from.
Thank you. Um, we appreciate you sharing that.
We do have some questions, if that's okay.
And I'm gonna start with, uh, lamo, Lydia Sini,
Uh, thanks chair. Thanks
Mark. Uh, for your, um, submission, um,
very clear in terms of the asset that you've got.
I wanted to quickly ask, uh, in terms of growing forward,
so you would support, uh, the bill, uh, with,
uh, how many licenses would you recommend in terms of that?
'cause I hear you loud and clear about the portion
of community funding
and the necessity why, uh, you've got a couple
of hurdles forward, but you've really highlighted
the facility who benefits, but you have got some worries.
Yeah, look, look, I do.
Um, you know, people are pro and anti-gambling. I get that.
There's positives and negatives that come out of it.
The reality of it, in my view, is it's going
to happen whether we like it or not.
And people will find a way to gamble,
whether it's at the local pokey machine,
whether it's online,
or whether it's in some nasty other space
where more than money could be, you know, at risk.
I'm no expert on how many license should
or shouldn't be given that I
don't think I'm the right person.
People will, people will find a way to make that work.
The point I'm making is I've been a huge advocate
of if the money's coming out of our community,
we should find a way to get a proportion of it back in.
And at the moment, that works well for us.
Um, you know, with our community wide
for everyone approach an opportunity.
And we've been blessed to have, uh, good relations with,
with the various providers in the gaming space up here
who have worked with us, understand the things
that we are trying to achieve,
and been fortunate enough to have funds to give to us.
As I say, we've received in the order
of a million dollars over both capital expenditure
and operational expenditure in the last year.
That was the difference between us opening this facility
and having it for intergenerational benefit.
And that's the benefit now for us to being sustainable
and we need to maintain that.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
And thank you for joining us online today.
Sorry we didn't get to see you,
but, um, we appreciate you taking the time.
We're gonna move to our next submission,
which will be from the Home Builders West Coast Trust.
So for members just down a couple while we shuffle around,
um, and hopefully we have Nikki online,
you can turn on your camera
and microphone, um, Nikki,
and we are excited to hear,
I think the first home builders trust that we've heard from.
Uh, and this is committee, so, um, 10, 10 minutes.
You might like to leave some time for questions.
I'll let you know when there's a minute to run
and we've got your written submission in front of us
as well, so the time is all yours.
Yeah. So, um, thanks for the opportunity today.
Um, we are a child
and family support service based in Westport, um, with, um,
another office in Greymouth,
but we work along the west coast of the South Island.
Mm-hmm. Um, and we've been operating, um, in the bull
for over 32 years, so a long time.
Um, and I've been with the organization under my operations
and funding manager's role, um,
for a very long time.
Probably been doing that role around funding
for about 10 or 12 years.
Um, so a large part of my role is to seek funding
for operational costs, which we are not funded for.
We are only funded to provide, uh, service delivery
for the contracts that we hold with.
Um, so we have to go out
and seek funding for just our normal general operating
expenses like power, rent, um, maintenance
around our build our offices, uh, phone
photocopier, all those things.
Um, so a large part of my role is applying
to gaming trusts for funding.
And although we don't advocate for gambling
and a lot of the families we deal with, um,
that there is an issue
and we, we don't, you know, advocate for it,
but we understand that it's part of society
and some people will gamble,
but what we want to do is reduce the harm
and, um, that there are benefits to the community in terms
of money coming back.
Um, and that funding enables us to be,
become more financially sustainable, um, to meet our needs.
And then in turn, we can then provide services
to the community in terms of social work support,
social workers in schools, counseling.
Um, we also hold another contract for the
Family Harm Prevention Network, which is around education,
around family harm.
Um, and so a lot of that, um, is education
and training for our community, um, bringing speakers in
also, um, providing resources to the community about
where they can seek help should they need it for
whatever issues are going on,
which sometimes can be financial, um, trauma,
alcohol and addiction, um,
family issues, those sort of things.
So what, yeah, it's a bit
of a double-edged sword for us.
You know, we, we don't encourage it,
but we also re rely on that funding, um, to,
to make our business an organization sustainable.
Um, we go for one-off projects.
Um, sometimes if we need to bring a trainer in
and we don't have a budget, we will apply for a project.
Um, yeah. Things like that.
I also, um, am involved
with other hats in the community in terms of sports, um,
around netball and gymnastics.
And we also, in, in the same boat, we are applying
for funding, um, for items of need equipment, uh,
to help with our running costs.
Um, and what, what this bill could mean is that
that money will go out of our community
and there'll be less available.
Um, the online gambling is proposal is saying
that it, it won't need to meet the normal gaming, um,
putting the funds back into the community,
which I think is about 40%, if I'm not correct.
Um, I apologize.
Um, but yeah, that,
that is what I would like to see happen
and for our organizations is that some of
that money from online gambling,
which we are finding out is overseas.
That pattern is that online gaming is increasing.
Um, and I was talking to, um,
a lady here in town who works in a bank,
and she, we were talking about this bill
and what it would mean, and she said that even she is saying
with the client, she deals with the amount of transactions
for online gambling, um, is, is increasing
and enough for her to notice and,
and mention that when we were talking about this in general
and what, what impact it would have, um, you know,
for our local netball club and that sort of thing.
So yeah, I think it's, it's really important
that we're at this stage
and we, um, make a really informed decision
and, um, we are behind the, the worldwide trends.
And if, if the worldwide trends are showing that, then,
you know, we need to kind of, um, we'll expect
that we will follow that.
Um, so here we can preempt it
and, um, put into place something where
not all those profits are going overseas to, um, yeah,
online gambling providers.
We want them to, you know, be accountable for, for
what they are, um, providing, um, and,
and make sure that our communities are
receiving some benefit.
Thank you, Nikki.
And thank you for taking the time to, to share
and I think really clear, particularly what I've taken from
that is that, um, need for community funding to go back
to the community and appreciate hearing from you,
not just home builders,
but you're also down here
representing the Bullah Gymnastics Club.
But as I hear the netball as well,
and that's seems to be so true, isn't it, of people like you
that, um, you know, you want something done, you give it
to someone busy and,
and you do, by the sound of it,
such an amazing job down there, uh, on the West coast
that I know that, um, you know, it makes a real difference.
So thank you for the work that you
and all the volunteers across those different codes
and activities do.
I'll just check if there were any other questions
though from my colleagues.
They don't appear to be.
I think you've just been so clear that it's,
we've got a very simple message to take there.
So thank you for joining us today
and we wish you all the best.
Thank you. Thanks for your time today.
Thanks. See you later. See
Now, um, members, we've just got two left.
Yeah. So we'll have trust
and then we should have Lavin community patrol to
Driving down. They should be here at
1230. Are
they driving? Oh, fantastic. Okay.
Well, that's the dedication you get from the ua. Alia.
Um, hopefully, uh, KA
or Matthew are on online
for us now, and they can turn on the camera.
Oh, we've got you both, uh, 10.
Thank you for joining us today.
We're, um, really looking forward to hearing from you.
And we've got 10 minutes set aside for you.
Um, and, uh, we've got your written submission in front
of us, so you can, you can take that as read if you'd like
and just speak to what you'd like to really highlight.
We'll let you know when there's a minute to go,
but you may like to leave some time
for questions over to you.
Um, I'll just go through that submission.
Um, my name is Matthew.
I'm the chair of trust at the outset,
let me say our support for the submissions made by
and trust.
I moved, however, to had my own personal voice
against this Kopa.
I draw the parallel of sending Maori troops overseas
to fight in walls that were not ours.
At first we were not good enough to shoulder arms even
to defend ourselves.
So we drove cooked, carried, dug trenches for ourselves
and others, the train unfamiliar, but we were thrust there.
Gallipoli and Zko, Vietnam, Korea, Afghanistan.
The list goes on, cannon follow.
And since we returned from those places, we are still trying
to recover from those devastations.
It is horrendous when you cannot see the enemy, but the pu
and the Nel were there from then on.
Our country is littered with the detritus
that has been foisted on us,
the confiscations broken promises,
the fast school envelopes,
and we have marched down haka inside
and outside the very house you are in petitions,
submissions, and we've tried to adjust
to the moving goalposts of the many issues
that have left us short of health, of manner of food,
shelter and warmth of dignity and even of life itself.
And now three months to persuade you that the you are
deciding on is going
to work under the rules you've prescribed.
How quaint, Prozac and Godly, or is it something else?
If I piece, uh, put a piece of good fruit in a bowl
of bad fruit, you know, what is going to happen?
So who do I speak for?
The mom who is gonna get the bash
because she's pokey fried, the household budge,
the nanny's desperate to feed and close their moles.
The kids who know what their parents are doing
and are too bummed out to go to school.
The dads who see the new onshore bedding limits raised
to $150 per week, two thirds of his wages, a quarter
of their rent, and more than their weekly
all the care I can't see, but you want me to engage with,
and you are going to tell me how I can do that
with whatever I have left of me in the trenches.
I was often blindsided and in the dark,
and you're giving me a blindfold now as well.
My indigenous cousins from around the world
know from their own bad experiences, casinos, drugs
and tobacco, and not the money makers or the nation makers.
Mm. Fame and fortune above ethics and morality.
Show me one person who has gained,
and I'll give you 10 who haven't
and often of the same families.
I will give you the checks
and balances of your need, is to show you upholding a robust
and fashionable democracy,
or that you are communicating between the levels
of your governance system up there, down to those of us
that you're given on the streets down here.
And it's no fake news.
I can't apologize if I haven't followed your process
correctly to allow you to disseminate my cord rule,
but let me just conclude it's
because my truth may not fit your guidelines.
Uh, did you want to add anything, Kath?
Yeah, I do. Bla Glen, please.
We still, we still have a few minutes.
Okay. So, um, yeah, I have, um,
huge concerns about the online casino gambling bill.
Um, I believe that it needs to have, uh, ity
or ang, um, embedded within it so
that we can have Maori voices at the table
and we can have active participation and, um, harmonization
and, um, prevention measures.
I believe the online casino gambling bill is another, uh,
way, uh, to make revenue of the backs
of our most vulnerable.
And I think it's, um,
there's a different way that that could be done.
Ideally, the government would see the, um, issues caused
by gambling, online gambling already
and actually take a bold stance
and, um, ban all online gambling, gambling.
Um, and the gambling industry already makes
around $2 million, um, of Maori
and other, um, ethnic minorities.
So, you know, we have to remember that there's more,
um, that, that we shouldn't be putting money before people.
We should be putting, um, people first.
Um, I don't see any lens of health equity here for Maori.
We have, uh, been carrying the inter intergenerational
impacts of gambling harm since the 1980s when the pokies
were introduced into.
And again, because of lack of ity embedment,
we don't have a voice in this space.
We, we are not able to actually actively defend ourselves.
We have to come to submission processes like this,
speak our truth in 10 minutes time,
and then, um, life goes on.
Um, so, but we see people every day.
Um, I've been working in this space for 10 years.
I've, I've done some, uh, critical policy analysis on, um,
gambling policy and, and, um, what's this bill is gonna do?
It's another, it's a gambling regulation which will usher in
the next wave of gambling harm inequities for Maori
and other, um, other cohorts, um, minority cohorts.
Um, I, uh, believe that, um, there should be no,
uh, advertising a complete ban on advertising.
We are normalizing gambling within our homes,
um, like lotto.
So we don't need that kind of setup.
We, um, there's, there's so many dangers with,
in the online gambling space.
It's a, it's a completely new beast, um, compared to lot of,
so, so I advocate that the, um,
that this bill will completely take online, um,
take advertising off the table, set up maybe a website
where people can go to the sites.
Are there, um, so, so no, no advertising on tally,
no advertising on social media.
I believe that the, the, um, the system,
the the system to have these, um, casino sites on board,
the, gosh, it's a, uh, the 15 sites are going
to be auctioned.
I think it's bad taste. I think it's poor, poor taste.
Hey, let's come along here guys,
and we'll all throw money into this
and whoever bid the most will get, get the prize.
Um, again, you, this is off the backs
of our most vulnerable people that are gonna fund this.
And I just think it's unethical and, and immoral.
I believe that there should only be three licenses
and not 15 if we're gonna go ahead with this.
Let's have three opportunities to gamble.
Um, and I also believe there needs
to be strong prevention measures put in place,
and they should be forefronted by people who, by Maori
and by those who experience the most harm not coming in
after the piece when the,
the decisions have already been made.
And give us a tokenistic voice at the table.
I think that's probably enough. Um, I could go on and on.
Um, but it, I know I've got a couple of minutes.
If you have any questions for Matua
or myself, then we're happy to, to,
Um, really appreciate that.
And, and I just wanted
to also just acknowledge the point in your recent one about
the National Self-Exclusion Register.
Um, that's something we have heard just from one
or two people, but I think it's a really, um,
a really important idea that you are, you are suggesting.
So I, I do just want to acknowledge that along with many
of the, some really tangible recommendations,
which is really helpful that give us, you know,
things we don't think about.
I I know we are out of time,
but if members are okay, I I would just like
to give the chance for a couple of questions.
So, um, Lydia,
Uh, thanks chair.
Thank you. Thank you. Uh, just a very quick question.
Uh, you may have seen that, uh, the industry has utilized,
uh, Maori young people, uh, in terms
of the influencing message.
Do you have any comments on that?
Um, that's what our big business does.
Um, we're talking about an addictive, um, uh,
addictive products that,
that the gambling industry is selling
and they're targeting Maori to
advertising targeting Maori to gamble.
So it's just underhanded tactics from a
multi-billion dollar industry.
We are small fries compared to them
and they're gonna crush us all the time.
So that's why we have to be very, very careful.
And I want to just make one more point.
Why are we not building a fence at the top of the hill?
Why are we putting an ambulance at the bottom
of this hill and of this cliff?
Because this is what this hooey is,
is the ambulance at the bottom of the cliff.
We need to do better. We've got an awesome opportunity here
to, to make it really strong.
'cause we are gonna be looking at decades
and decades of harm to come,
which will impact our whole communities, right?
We live together. We are not isolated from each other.
We live in the same community.
So we need to care for our people first
and then everything will flow from there.
I just, one comment
and that is how are we going to distinguish
between different ages of people, of young people
who may get on their keyboards?
Yeah. We don't have any way of doing that.
Thank you very much for your thoughtful submission
and your personal, um, commitment.
I was interested in the idea that
some people have suggested that we just ban
online casino gambling altogether. Yep.
Um, Rather than license it
and legislate and try and address these matters.
Um, presumably that will be a completely different bill
with its own challenges for enforcement.
But I just wondered if you had any comments on that thought.
Let me, let me put it this way, Celia, you
construct a bicycle park, a pathway
and you ask cyclists to ride along along that.
But how do you stop other people from using that cyclo path?
And yes. Let's, let's ban it completely
and let's geo block all these sites out.
It can be done. Look at China, it's definitely doable
to block down sites, right?
So a hundred percent. Let's do that. Let's do that.
We've already got enough harm in our community right now.
Um, our gambling, um, environment is, is already harming
our ethnic minorities, especially Maori, um, generationally.
So yes, let's do that. Let's completely ban online gambling.
Let's change the legislation and then let's geo block
and phase out all online gambling to keep our whanau safe.
Love the idea, Celia. Let's do it.
Oh, ki thank you for your time.
Um, we are out time there, but we appreciate you joining us
and your excellent written submission as well.
So thank you.
Sure. Uh, now members, we are just waiting
for our last minute to join us.
They are not running late.
They were, they had just been brought
forward to an earlier time.
So, um, I wonder if we can, uh,
in a minute just suspend a couple of minutes
until they get here.
We'll resume the meeting. We'll just let them.
Fantastic. Are you ready to go? Pretty much. Yeah.
I'm, I take it that the, um, submission is read.
Yes. So you, so we have got 10 minutes set aside for this.
You can take, the submission is read, you might like
to leave some time for questions Sure.
At the end. And I'll let you
know when there's a minute to run.
Otherwise, the floor is all yours.
Well, perfect. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
And, um, as it has been taken as read,
and I'm aware that many of you'll probably want to go away
and start screaming at each other in about an hour's time,
I'll keep it a bit straightforward.
Some more than others, I suppose.
Um, see on behalf
of the Levin Community Patrol,
we have some serious questions
and reservations around the bill as it currently stands.
Mm. And a lot of that has to do with the
proposed license holders for the online bill,
um, being able to
operate in this country without offering their proceeds
to the community in the same way that a lot
of the current physical casinos, lotto, TAB,
et cetera, currently does.
And I'm sure you've heard from a lot of the submitters today
and over the last few days, much of the same concerns
that we have, that we've applied
for a lot of stuff through grants.
We recently, in the last, just
before 12 months ago, purchased an Isuzu DMAX u uh,
for about $56,000, all of that coming through grants.
And that vehicle was particularly useful.
I actually drove it down here today,
so if you wanna have a little photo up with it later,
I'm not opposed to that, maybe drive it onto the forecourt,
but no, it's not.
The stairs not, not up the stairs. No,
of course not up the stairs.
Sorry. No, that, that's all good.
But that vehicle has been quite useful for a lot
of our operations in assisting the police.
Uh, a good example of that was during Operation Purple six,
which on King's birthday weekend as Mr.
Chairman you would know with the Boy Racer operation,
which the patrol was involved
with doing reconnaissance and surveillance work.
And a lot of the aftermath involved in that has led to,
um, detainment of vehicles and arrests, which both patrol
and other police adjacent organizations,
which also rely on grants have, um, have
utilized well, we're using.
And, and I've, I've spoken with a lot of organizations
that I'm involved with.
I was talking with Ted Melton, the chair of the community,
Canberra Trust, and to preempt perhaps a couple of questions
that you might have.
Um, how do we resolve this beyond
where it currently sits?
Obviously a lot of people in a lot of groups would want you
to, what's the term I'm looking for?
They would want you to expand it so
that casino operators operating online are able
to give their proceeds back to the community.
I note that in the gambling act, the purpose of that is
that funds that are raised must go back to the community.
I think it's a shame that in the current,
and the bill as it currently stands,
the organization I represent says the word community more
times than the bill itself.
So I think that says a lot about perhaps the aims
of this bill as it currently sits.
And going back to my point with the Camera Trust
and a couple of other organizations,
there was an application
or applications were being made for the proceeds
of crime fund, and that was something which the camera trust
and the patrol to a certain extent were involved with.
I know that our patrol is looking at other options
for funding for different things.
We recently made an application to the district council.
I know that you've seen, I've looked at a couple of other,
uh, submissions from other groups.
The Swell Community Trust,
community Patrol mentioned getting new uniforms, Foxton
and Beach, their chair, Kerry Beaton, who we've,
who we've worked with very closely, uh, with, uh,
training operations to get their
patrol up and running again.
So there's a lot of groups that are impacted by this.
I think overall, as I said,
we are very much in a similar position to a lot
of other organizations and I'm happy to kind
of go over any questions that you might have.
But that's, um, that's pretty much the scope of it.
Thank you. And can I just, um, acknowledge
as the proud local P for DU currently?
Absolutely. Um, the, the great work
that the community patrol do there,
but particularly Queen's birthday that night, the,
the police did a remarkable job.
And, and there were a number
of community patrol officers out not just that night,
but the following nights to, um, to support that operation
with, with some great outcomes and a
and a significant number of follow up arrests,
which is great news for our community.
Uh, with that though, um, questions, I think Sue Redman,
did you have a question?
Um, th well, first of all, thank you
and thank you for what you do.
And I, I was privileged
to be at your A GM just a few weeks ago.
It's outstanding what you do to acknowledge
what Tim said in regards to the boy race issue,
which is a significant problem across the country.
Um, I think the sentiments that you shared, um,
have been reflected by a huge number
of submitters community organizations across the country
and also sporting organizations.
So thank you very much for your submission
and thanks for making the effort to turn up today.
It's awesome.
And do, uh, do you have a question just very quickly,
LA Lydia please
And want to echo, um, what Susan's, just in terms
of your work, it's brilliant, valuable
and helpful to, you know, police can't do everything.
So community Charles, um, just wanted to ask in terms
of your membership, 'cause you probably said it, um,
that's the first one and quickly supplementary
after that is how many sort
of people under 30 do you have on your
patrols all coming through?
Okay, so the total membership
of our patrol is currently stands is 28,
which is very similar to a number
of other patrols in terms of under thirties.
We do have a few people that have always,
always sparked an interest in the patrol
and helping out with the police.
Uh, there's certain pathways to do doing that.
The pathways to police program is a good example of that.
In terms of the current membership, um,
I think they take up the space on this table.
So that's, uh, that's, um, it's always good to have people
who are committed, but we are always looking
to, to grow our membership.
And if I've got the opportunity just making a couple
of other points around other organizations with the, um,
with the patrol, with the camera trust, there is a need
for more funding, as you can imagine, to come into our,
come into our community.
I was in a meeting in my capacity as the vice president
of the live racing club with the TKI Maori Racing Club,
and I think the majority of this table has been
to a live racing club meeting.
Yeah. And I know that, I think everyone at this table is
quite enthusiastic about our,
our racing industry, so that's fantastic.
Whether you've been to the, the Wellington Cup
or the, uh, races up in toga I'm sure.
But, um, but of course talking to those representatives,
they're making application grants all the time,
other organizations are as well.
And I'm, I'm aware that there's perhaps a misconception that
with this bill there would be a decrease in the funding.
And I'm aware that it's more a case of just having a bit of,
um, consistency
and that new funding is allocated to communities
through changes to the bill,
which we propose our organization.
I mean, we're about serving our community,
the eyes and ears of the police.
We don't have a position on gambling personally.
I mean, I've got a TAB account.
I mean, I, I was at the Christchurch Casino a month ago
to play blackjack for the first,
and based on the financial outcome probably the last time.
So, um, I mean, gambling can be fun
and I, I do enjoy it from time to time,
but it's social responsibility
and it's balancing that with the harm minimization
and the, the problem gambling,
which we do have in our communities.
And we're in a very weird conundrum with that compared
to our organizations which need to have funding
through these gaming grants.
The racing industry is a good example of that.
We've got a sort of a, an arranged marriage with,
with wagering and with gambling.
So I'm used to that.
But it's, um, anything that the parliament can do,
select community can do, the government can do would
be warmly welcome.
Thank you. And, and good work. Keep up. Thank you. Thank
You, thank you.
And that does bring us to the end of our time
and the end of submissions for the day.
So with you for joining us, um, and all the good focus.
And with that members we will, um, adju.
Thank you. Thank You. Appreciate it. Makes sense Tara.